[[PAGE 1]]
Benchmarking ﬂood risk reduction in the Elbe River
W. Grabs
International Water Affairs, Federal Institute of Hydrology, Koblenz, Germany
Correspondence
Dr Wolfgang Grabs, Federal Institute of
Hydrology, Koblenz, Germany
Email: grabs@bafg.de
DOI: 10.1111/jfr3.12217
Key words
Benchmarking; Elbe River; ﬂood risk
reduction; integrated ﬂood risk
management; International Flood
Initiative.
Abstract
The past decade has seen the development and overall acceptance of the concept
of Integrated Flood Risk Management. This approach strives to balance positive
and negative effects of riverine ﬂoods and combines it with risk management
concepts. In practice, this has led to a diversiﬁcation of ﬂood management
practices that go beyond traditional structural ﬂood protection measures
towards non-structural measures. These include giving more space for rivers,
backwards location of dykes, re-naturalisation of ﬂood plains and a suite of
improved information systems including improved ﬂood forecasting services,
promoting ﬂood risk awareness and self-help capabilities. The paper describes
in some detail the process of benchmarking to support effective planning,
implementation and monitoring of integrated ﬂood risk management activities
that require a set of quantiﬁable measures, against which progress in ﬂood risk
management can be referenced. The case of the extreme Elbe River ﬂoods in
2002 and 2013 triggered the development and implementation of the Elbe
Flood Protection – Action Plan that in large parts has been implemented. The
paper shows the basic concepts of the Elbe Flood Protection Plan and its actions
and puts these in the context of a benchmarking framework. The paper con-
cludes that although elements of a benchmarking concept are outlined in the
Action Plan, the establishment of benchmarking practices as a tool in ﬂood risk
management is in its infancy. The development of a consistent benchmarking
procedure would have the potential to improve further the effectiveness of
Integrated Flood Risk Management practices in national and international river
basins.
Introduction
In the past two decades, there has been a growing recogni-
tion that traditional methods of ﬂood management if taken
in isolation do not yield the expected results. Structural
measures as beneﬁcial as they show that ﬂood hazards can be
mitigated but not eliminated. Absolute safety from ﬂoods is
a treacherous illusion as this is in most cases technically and
economically not feasible and even may result in negative
effects such as ecological degradation of ﬂood plains. Engi-
neering solutions such as dams and dykes if taken in isola-
tion may pretend an increased safety when on the other hand
they may be the cause of an increased residual risk and
resulting vulnerability of people and infrastructure in case of
a failure of the dam/dyke as a result of an extreme event.
The basic concept of Integrated Flood Management
(IFM) is to ‘integrate land and water resources development
in a river basin, within the context of Integrated Water
Resources Management, with a view to maximising the efﬁ-
cient use of ﬂoodplains and to minimising loss of life and
property’ (W orld Meteorological Organization, 2009).
Figure 1 provides a model for integrated ﬂood management
taking into account non-structural measures as well as
socio-economic and environmental aspects.
In essence, integrated ﬂood management encompasses a
‘best mix’ of structural measures and non-structural meas-
ures that include, for example improved warning systems as
well as the application of innovative measures including
reactivation of former ﬂood plains, backwards relocation of
dykes improvements on land use practices as well as strategic
approaches aiming towards adaptation to change as a result
of demographic, economic, environmental and climate
change. Figure 2 depicts examples for strategies and options
in Integrated Flood Management.
Flood risk management
In addition to the adoption of an integrated ﬂood manage-
ment concept, the additional concept of risk management is
J Flood Risk Management•• (2015) ••–•• © 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons LtdJ Flood Risk Management 9 (2016) 335–342 © 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd


[[PAGE 2]]
important as risk management entails the planning and
implementation of suitable measures that prevent ﬂood
hazards to become a disaster in a socio-economic context.
‘Flood risk’ means the combination of the probability of a
ﬂood event and of the potential adverse consequences for
human health, the environment, cultural heritage and eco-
nomic activity associated with a ﬂood event (EC, 2007).
The management of ﬂood risks encompasses a wide range
of socio-economic aspects dealing with culture-sensitive
issues related to ‘acceptable risk’ versus ‘tolerable’ or ‘unac-
ceptable’ risks. In this way, risk management can be seen in
the context of decision making under uncertainty, limited
resources and the need for prioritisation. Inherently, ﬂood
risk management needs to be applied in a ﬂexible manner to
enable adaptation to changing conditions including demo-
graphic and economic developments and climate change.
Figure 3 shows the evolution of ﬂood management from
ﬂood control towards ﬂood risk management.
In accordance to article 7 of the EC Flood Directive,‘Flood
risk management plans shall address all aspects of ﬂood risk
management focusing on prevention, protection, and pre-
paredness, including ﬂood forecasts and early warning
systems and taking into account the characteristics of the
particular river basin or sub-basin. Flood risk management
plans may also include the promotion of sustainable land use
practices, improvement of water retention as well as the
controlled ﬂooding of certain areas in the case of a ﬂood
event’ (EC, 2007). It needs to be mentioned here that in an
international European and transboundary context, inte-
grated ﬂood risk management needs to be supportive and
non-contradictory to national and international legislation
within an overall agreed ﬂood risk management framework.
Experience shows that collaboration between insurance
operators, government authorities and other key stakehold-
ers is crucial when it comes to encouraging risk reduction in
both the public and private sectors (Amendola et al., 2013,
cited in Zürich Insurance Group, 2014). An important aspect
in ﬂood risk management is the concept of ‘resilience’:
Experiences from past ﬂoods show that rebuilding efforts
without improving resilience – such as stated in Zurich, 2014
is a waste of public and private spending. As outlined below,
the achievement of improved resilience needs to be bench-
marked against best practices and standards (Figure 4).
The ‘ As Low As Reasonably Practical principle’ (Abhas
et al., 2012) provides a useful framework to identify different
levels of risk acceptance including acceptable risk, tolerable
risk and unacceptable risk from the viewpoint of societal risk
perception. It is therefore a valuable component in stake-
holder participation in decision-making processes at the
lowest appropriate level of intervention. Attitudes and toler-
ance to risk can be measured such as through the use of
Rapid Participatory Assessments and stakeholder consulta-
tions that are linked to an assessment matrix. Figure 5 illus-
trates this approach.
As a practical approach to ﬂood risk management, the
reduction of risk can be achieved by traditional structural
measures and increasingly by non-structural measures
including:
Figure 1 Integrated Flood Management Model (World
Meteorological Organization, 2009).
Figure 2 Strategies and options for Integrated Flood Manage-
ment (World Meteorological Organization, 2009).
2 Grabs
© 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd J Flood Risk Management•• (2015) ••–••© 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd J Flood Risk Management 9  (2016) 335–342
336 Grabs
 1753318x, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jfr3.12217 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [12/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 3]]
Figure 3 The evolution of ﬂood risk management practices (Sayers et al., 2013).
Figure 4 Concept of Integrated Flood Risk Management (Sayers et al., 2013).
Benchmarking ﬂood reduction 3
J Flood Risk Management•• (2015) ••–•• © 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons LtdJ Flood Risk Management 9 (2016) 335–342 © 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Benchmarking fl ood reduction 337
 1753318x, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jfr3.12217 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [12/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 4]]
• Reduction of the exposure of people to ﬂoods;
• Reduction of vulnerability of those exposed to risk;
• Improvement of resilience of populations who have
experienced ﬂoods that is also known as an improved
capacity of ﬂood-affected populations to rebound from
disaster.
Benchmarking as a tool for integrated
ﬂood risk management
Effective planning, implementation and monitoring of inte-
grated ﬂood risk management activities require a set of
quantiﬁable measures, against which progress in ﬂood risk
management can be referenced. The process to achieve this is
called benchmarking. As simple deﬁnition of benchmarking
is: ‘ A predeﬁned position, used as a reference point for taking
measures against’ (concepts of benchmarking, Andersen and
Pettersen, 1996). T raditionally however, the use of bench-
marking in ﬂood management is rather conﬁned to the
establishment of ﬁxed numbers such as maximum ﬂood
levels, ﬂood events of various recurrence periods or levels
of exceedance. The concept is also used for cost control
when linked to a cost-beneﬁt process and loss reduction.
Benchmarking has also been used extensively in the
intercomparison of models used for ﬂood risk reduction
such as comparing hydraulic model predictions with analyti-
cal solutions, ﬁeld data, physical model data and other model
predictions of real or hypothetical ﬂood events (Néelz and
Pender, 2013). The benchmarking concept however is much
wider in scope as it can be used as reference against existing
standards (such as used in Quality Management and T otal
Quality Control practices) and in documented best practices
in ﬂood risk management. In this regard, benchmarking
against best practices goes beyond comparing numbers and
instead describes ‘the process of identifying, learning, adapt-
ing, and measuring outstanding practices and processes
from any organisation to improve performance’ (PERI,
1999). In a wider sense and equally relevant to ﬂood risk
management, benchmarking can be used against political
objectives and improvements in integrated ﬂood risk
management.
Launched in 2013, the ﬂagship project of the United
Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization/
W orld Meteorological Organization (UNESCO/WMO)
International Flood Initiative focuses on quantitative perfor-
mance benchmarking, development of a methodology for
globally identifying hazard, exposure of people and infra-
structure to ﬂoods, and risk.
According to T uominen 1993 and 1997, cited in Kulmala
(concepts of benchmarking), there are four distinct types of
benchmarking:
• Strategic benchmarking;
• Performance benchmarking;
• Process benchmarking; and
• Competence benchmarking.
T ranslated into the context of Integrated Flood Risk Man-
agement, strategic benchmarking may be understood as ana-
lysing best practices and understanding why they worked
under speciﬁc conditions with the aim to adapt current
practices to best practices. In another meaning, strategic
benchmarking could relate to the deﬁnition or analysis of
policies in Integrated Flood Risk Management (IFRM) and
the identiﬁcation of alternatives under given political
(including transboundary), socio-economic and environ-
mental boundary conditions. Strategic benchmarking would
then also distinguish between short-term and long-term
goals taking into account uncertainties related to changes
(including climate change) and changes in a socio-economic
and political context. On a strategic level, ﬂood risk manage-
ment policies could also be taken as strategic benchmarks
whose degree of achievement needs to be measured.
Performance benchmarking in an IFRM context focuses
on the quality of service delivery of organisations with
responsibilities in ﬂood risk management. As there can be
many organisations involved, the benchmarking process
might be complex as not only the quality of service delivery
of single organisations needs to be looked at but also the
effectiveness of their communication and cooperation needs
to be considered. Benchmarking indicators would indicate
measures of both the quality of services and, more impact
oriented, the effectiveness of service delivery in support of
IFRM activities. Performance benchmarking aims at identi-
fying comparative performance of the efﬁciency and effec-
tiveness of organisations and/or processes (see below). As an
Figure 5 Concept of risk acceptance (Abhas et al., 2012), adapted
from: FLOOD site ‘Language of Risk’).
4 Grabs
© 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd J Flood Risk Management•• (2015) ••–••© 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd J Flood Risk Management 9  (2016) 335–342
338 Grabs
Unacceptable Risk
ALARP or tolerable Risk
Broadly 
acceptable 
Risk
- Risk cannot be jus/g415ﬁed 
save in extraordinary 
circumstances
- Tolerable only if risk reduc/g415on 
is imprac/g415cable or if beneﬁts 
only marginally greater than 
costs
- Tolerable if beneﬁts not 
signiﬁcantly greater than
costs
- Necessary to maintain 
assurance that risk 
remains at this level
Negligible Risk
 1753318x, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jfr3.12217 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [12/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 5]]
example, for ﬂood forecasting services, the benchmarking
process could focus on the accuracy and timeliness of deliv-
ered forecasts and on its effectiveness in terms of user friend-
liness of forecasts as input for decision making.
Process benchmarking concentrates ﬁrst on the analysis of
existing processes that are expected to lead to the improve-
ment of ﬂood risk management. Then, the most promising
processes are identiﬁed either as a result of continuous
improvement of existing processes against set standards
(benchmarks) or using benchmarks that have been identi-
ﬁed as result of an analysis of best practices. These can then
be used as goals to be achieved in the process. In ﬂood risk
management, the process benchmarking needs to be viewed
as a process that can turn resource inputs into outputs and
outcomes. The process-oriented ‘audit’ described below
could prove as a critical component of process benchmark-
ing in that its result may show behavioural changes towards
approaches in ﬂood risk perception and management.
Competence benchmarking relates to the change in atti-
tudes and behaviour of individuals and organisations with
respect to ﬂood risk reduction. Examples are the change in
attitude and behaviour in risk awareness and preparedness,
or organisational changes to streamline competencies and
hierarchies. In a wider context, competence benchmarking
aims at the improvement of the capacity of people, experts,
decision makers and organisations to positively contribute to
the aims and objectives of IFRM at technical (i.e. ﬂood fore-
casting) and managerial levels (i.e. being prepared for ﬂoods,
delivery of services to potentially affected people). It could
also be related to improve competences in lateral thinking
with a focus towards planning and implementation of truly
integrated ﬂood risk management activities. An important
issue in competence benchmarking is communication and
information management.
In Figure 4, benchmarking could be applied to the left-
hand part of the ﬂood risk management circle (monitoring
and implementation).
T o put benchmarking into practice, the following steps are
suggested:
1. Develop a benchmarking framework along quantiﬁable
objectives, expected results and associated actions to
achieve the desired results.
2. Deﬁne the area, environment and socio-economic condi-
tions for which the benchmarking framework would be
established.
3. Identify what to benchmark and the benchmarks them-
selves (such as through static indicators, percentage
changes, aggregated indicators, process-oriented bench-
marks, progress against best practices).
4. Determine how benchmark results will be used in the
integrated ﬂood risk management process.
5. Determine quantiﬁable and robust indicators and their
data requirements.
6. Interpret progress in Integrated Flood Risk Management
through the chosen indicators.
7. Set goals and develop an action plan (or adapt existing
action plans).
8. Monitor improvements in ﬂood risk reduction against
deﬁned benchmarks, noting that benchmarks will need to
be adapted to changing conditions too.
The benchmarking steps above have been adapted from
Kulmala (2002) and from Spendolini (1992).
As an approach for the establishment of a benchmarking
process, an audit can be used such as promoted by Deutsche
V ereinigung für Wasserwirtschaft (DW A) (DW A, 2010):
‘ Audit Floods: How well are we prepared’ . The audit addresses
single communities and other larger organisational entities
within subareas of a river basin. Inherent to the audit process
is the offer to undertake a professionally facilitated audit
aiming towards an assessment of the degree and quality of
ﬂood preparedness measures to mitigate impacts of poten-
tially disastrous ﬂoods. The audit is complementary to and
supportive of the concept of integrated ﬂood risk manage-
ment. The audit assesses the degree of achievement in reach-
ing a user-deﬁned predetermined overall goal for ﬂood risk
management under speciﬁc local conditions. Some 35 cri-
teria and indicators are used for the audit. The audit follows
a process-oriented approach that is oriented along the assess-
ment of critical boundary conditions, which are essential for
the improvement of ﬂood risk management activities. Cri-
teria and indicators used in the audit relate to the assessment
of a current status in predeﬁned topics where an integrated
ﬂood risk management process can be established or
improved, using ratings such as:
• No ﬂood risk management concept available, nothing has
been done;
• First successful approaches, much needs to be done;
• Good standards, improvements are possible;
• Viable ﬂood risk management concept and actions, all
homework done.
Using the audit approach, setting further quantiﬁable
benchmarks against speciﬁc actions can then be used to
assess progress in activities towards integrated ﬂood risk
management against deﬁned benchmarks as reference. His-
torically, most ﬂood risk management activities have been
triggered after catastrophic ﬂood events. Addressing this
issue, Abhas et al. (2012) state that ‘It is critically important
to monitor and benchmark ﬂood risk management even
when there has not been a ﬂood event for some time’ .
Flood risk management – the Elbe
case study
Describing the Elbe as a case study for ﬂood risk manage-
ment also shows the application potential of the benchmark-
ing concept if it were implemented in a holistic manner.
Benchmarking ﬂood reduction 5
J Flood Risk Management•• (2015) ••–•• © 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons LtdJ Flood Risk Management 9 (2016) 335–342 © 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Benchmarking fl ood reduction 339
 1753318x, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jfr3.12217 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [12/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 6]]
With a catchment area of 148.000 km 2 and a population
of 25 million people, the Elbe River is one of the most
prominent river basins in Europe that is shared between
Germany, Czech Republic, Poland and Austria. The devas-
tating ﬂood in 2002 has been the starting point for the devel-
opment of the Action Plan – Flood Protection Elbe (IKSE,
2003) by the International Commission for the Protection of
the Elbe River (ICPER). The Action Plan – Flood Protection
Elbe contains basic elements of the concept of integrated
ﬂood risk management as described above (Figure 6).
The 2002 ﬂood had a statistical return period of 100 years
and likewise the ﬂood event in 2013 had a statistical recur-
rence period of over 100 years and had been the worst ever
recorded in history. The ﬂood event of 2002 in the entire
Elbe River Basin has become a reference in Europe for
extreme ﬂood events. Lessons learnt from the 2002 ﬂood
event as documented in the Elbe Flood Action Plan were
further reﬁned and actions adjusted in the light of the
experiences of the 2013 extreme ﬂoods. Structural measures
including dykes and polders still play a prominent role in
ﬂood protection plans in the Elbe basin. However, non-
structural measures including the application of the concept
of ‘ﬂood preparedness’ and ‘room for the river’ have gained
in importance. The concept ‘room for river’ attempts to
restore partly ﬂood plains through the relocation of dykes,
such as shown in Figure 7.
ICPER states (IKSE, 2012) that the Elbe Flood Action Plan
has been validated as a useful instrument in ﬂood risk man-
agement. The plan and the results and lessons learnt of its
implementation are integrated and continued in the imple-
mentation of the European Directive for the Assessment and
Management of Floods (EC, 2007).
In some more detail (Socher, 2014), the ‘ Action Plan –
Flood Protection Elbe’ contains measures to:
• Improve natural retention of ﬂood waters in the ﬂood
plains as well as in tributaries and natural wetlands;
• Reactivate former ﬂood plains where this is feasible such as
through the relocation of dykes;
• Improve ﬂood prevention in ﬂood hazard areas, including
measures related to risk preparedness and management,
inﬂuencing behavioural patterns of populations at risk
through risk awareness programmes, identiﬁcation and
realisation of basic principles in land use planning and
land utilisation of areas that have attributed with quanti-
ﬁable risk classiﬁcations;
• Improve ﬂood forecasting and ﬂood information systems
improve community-based ﬂood prevention and action
plans;
• Review design ﬂood criteria;
• Implement structural measures aiming at ﬂood protec-
tion, speciﬁcally through the rehabilitation of existing and
construction of new dykes, controllable ﬂood retention
polders, weirs, enlargement of the ﬂow capacity of river
channels.
These measures have been undertaken or are in progress
and have shown to be effective during ﬂood events with
signiﬁcantly reduced damages and loss of lives and liveli-
hoods. T o illustrate this observation with an example, the
extension of the ﬂood forecasting period from 24 to 48 h in
Figure 6 The Elbe River Basin in Europe.
Figure 7 Dam relocation at the middle Elbe River (Damm, 2013).
6 Grabs
© 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd J Flood Risk Management•• (2015) ••–••© 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd J Flood Risk Management 9  (2016) 335–342
340 Grabs
 1753318x, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jfr3.12217 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [12/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 7]]
the Czech part of the Elbe River basin has led to an increased
ﬂood warning lead time from 36 to 60 h for the city of
Dresden.
An important aspect of ﬂood risk management in the Elbe
has been the realisation that for a successful basin – wide
ﬂood risk management plan and its implementation close
cooperation between riparian countries at all levels is indis-
pensable and mutually beneﬁcial. On a political level, this
includes the preparedness to engage in compromises to
ensure achievement of envisaged results.
There is still a priority for ﬂood protection with a prefer-
ence to structural measures. Non-structural measures
aiming at ﬂood preparedness and risk management are
gaining in importance, especially with regard to land use
planning and land management, improved cooperation
between riparian countries and the improvement of ﬂood
forecasting services. In this regard, the Elbe Ministerial Con-
ference (10 November 2006) reiterated its decision, whereas
measures for the backwards location of dykes and the con-
struction of controlled ﬂood-control polders should be con-
tinued with vigour as shown in Figure 7. That includes also
the creation of additional storage in reservoirs and retention
basins.
The process-oriented DW A Audit approach as described
above has been successfully conducted for the city of
Dresden. (Wache and Pﬂügner, 2012). One of its main con-
clusions is that the Audit method is useful to promote ﬂood
preparedness on community basis, which makes the audit
tool an essential supplement for ﬂood risk management. In
this regard, the Audit could serve as a ﬁrst example of the
application of a process-oriented benchmarking effort in the
Elbe river basin.
Outlook
Reviewing recent ﬂood events and lessons learnt especially
from the 2002 and 2013 ﬂoods in the Elbe River Basin and its
risk management concept and associated action plans, the
Elbe River Basin Management Plan for the period 2016–
2021 is currently under development and is expected to be
published before the end of 2015.
Looking beyond the Elbe River Basin, the conference of
the Environment Ministers of the Federal States of Germany
in their session from 2 September 2013 (Rickmeyer, 2014)
viewed the ﬂood events of the recent past as starting impacts
of climate change and decided to:
• Maintain ﬂood plains in the future through long-term
spatial management;
• G i v em o r er o o mf o rt h er i v e r s ;
• Maintain the function of ﬂood plains through a long-term
spatial management concept;
• Review design-ﬂood criteria;
• Develop a national ﬂood protection programme.
The development of a benchmarking framework and
application of benchmarking practices as described in this
paper have the potential to signiﬁcantly improve the effec-
tiveness of these envisaged measures.
Conclusions
Based on the concept of Integrated Water Resources Man-
agement, the past 15 years have seen the evolvement and
worldwide acceptance of the concept of Integrated Risk
Flood Management. The development of a consistent bench-
marking framework in Integrated Flood Risk Management is
in its infancy. Such a framework would be used to bench-
mark goals, measures, best practices and the degree to which
success in reaching set objectives have been achieved, using
quantiﬁable standards and indicators. For this purpose, the
benchmarking concept has been discussed in greater detail
in this paper. In the case of the Elbe River, success has been
achieved in the continued implementation of the ‘ Action
Plan – Flood Protection Elbe’ . This plan contains basic
elements of Integrated Flood Risk Management practices.
Supplementary tools such as the DW A Audit could be a
starting point towards the development of a benchmarking
framework. The paper advocates the development of a con-
sistent benchmarking procedure that would have the poten-
tial to improve further the effectiveness of Integrated Flood
Risk Management practices in national and international
river basins.
There is a need to muster international support to imple-
ment such a benchmarking framework that would serve as a
milestone in reaching the objectives of the Flagship Project
of the UNESCO/WMO International Flood Initiative to
support benchmarking ﬂood risk reduction at global,
national and local levels. This will serve as a milestone in
benchmarking disaster risk for securing sustainability targets
in the post-2015 sustainable development agenda.
References
Abhas K., Bloch B. & Lamond C. Cities and Flooding – A Guide
to Integrated Urban Flood Risk Management for the 21st
Century. Washington D.C.: The W orld Bank, 2012.
Amendola A., Ermolieva T., Linnerooth-Bayer J. & Mechler R.
Catastrophe models for informing risk management: an
introduction. In: A. Amendola, T. Ermolieva, J.
Linnerooth-Bayer & R. Mechler, eds. Integrated Catastrophe
Risk Modeling: Supporting Policy Processes . Dordrecht, the
Netherlands.: Springer, 2013, 3–12.
A n d e r s e nB .&P e t t e r s e nP . G .The Benchmarking Handbook .
Springer, 1996. 1995 – Business & Economics.
Damm C. KIT-WWF Auen-Institut, Rastatt. History and imple-
mentation of the Lenzen-Wustrow Dike relocation. BA W-
Mitteilungen, Nr.9/2013, 2013.
Benchmarking ﬂood reduction 7
J Flood Risk Management•• (2015) ••–•• © 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons LtdJ Flood Risk Management 9 (2016) 335–342 © 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Benchmarking fl ood reduction 341
 1753318x, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jfr3.12217 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [12/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 8]]
DW A. DW A Regelwerk, Merkblatt DW A-M 551 Audit
‘Hochwasser – wie gut sind wir vorbereitet’ , Dezember 2010,
published by: DW A Deutsche V ereinigung für
Wasserwirtschaft, Abwasser und Abfall, Hennef, Deutschland,
2010.
EC. Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council of
23 October 2007 on the assessment and management of
ﬂood risks (2007/60/EC). Ofﬁcial Journal 2007, L 288/27.
Internationale Kommission zum Schutz der Elbe (IKSE).
Aktionsplan Hochwasserschutz – Elbe, Internationale
Kommission zum Schutz der Elbe, Postfach 1647/1648, 39006
Magdeburg Germany, 24. October 2003, 2003.
Internationale Kommission zum Schutz der Elbe (IKSE).
Länderübergreifender Hochwasserschutz an der Elbe – Ein
Abschlussbericht 10 Jahre nach der Flut. Internationalen
Kommission zum Schutz der Elbe 17. August 2012, Postfach
1647/1648, 39006 Magdeburg Germany, 17 October 2012,
2012.
Kulmala J. Approaches to benchmarking. [Online] Finnish
Employers’ Management Development InstituteFEMDI,
2002. http://www15.uta.ﬁ/yksikot/entrenet/hankerekisteri/
hanke5_benchmarking.htm [accessed 22 October 2014].
Néelz S. & Pender G. Benchmarking the Latest Generation of 2D
Hydraulic Modelling Packages. UK Environment Agency,
2013. August 2013.
Public Entity Risk Institute (PERI). Benchmarking, Best Prac-
tices, and Performance Measurements for Public Entity Risk
Management Guideline. Fairfax: PERI, 1999.
Rickmeyer A. Konsequenzen aus den Hochwasserereignissen
(Präsentation) 2013 Niedersächsisches Ministerium für
Umwelt, Energie und Klimaschutz 23. April 2014 – BWK
Hannover, 2014.
Sayers P ., Li Y ., Galloway G., Penning-Rowsell E., Shen F ., W en
K., Chen Y . & Le Quesne T. Flood Risk Management: A Stra-
tegic Approach. Paris: UNESCO, 2013.
Socher M. Informationsveranstaltung “Hochwasserschutz an der
Elbe”. 1 | 5. Juni 2014 Bad Schandau, Presentation, 2014.
Spendolini M. The Benchmarking Book . New Y ork: American
Management Association, 1992.
T uominen K.Benchmarking Prosessiopas. Opi Ja Kehitä
Kilpailijoita Nopeammin. Metalliteollisuuden Kustannus.
T ammer Paino, 1993.
T uominen K. Muutoshallinnan mestari. Kuinka toteuttaa
strategiset suunnitelmat kilpailijoita nopeammin? Suomen
Laatuyhdistys ry, 1997.
Wache F . & Pﬂügner W. DW A-Statusseminar ‘ Audit Hochwasser
– Wie gut sind wir vorbereitet? Pilotvorhaben zur
Durchführung von Audits’. Osnabrück 2012, 3. Juli 2012.
W orld Meteorological Organization. Associated Programme on
Flood Management (APFM): integrated ﬂood management.
Concept Paper, WMO-No. 1047, Geneva, 2009.
Zürich Insurance Group. European ﬂoods: using lessons learned
to Reduce Risks, 2014. http://www.zurich.com/_/media/dbe/
corporate/docs/whitepapers/european-ﬂoods-using-lessions-
learned.pdf?la=en [accessed 22 October 2014].
8 Grabs
© 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd J Flood Risk Management •• (2015) ••–••© 2015 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) and John Wiley & Sons Ltd J Flood Risk Managemen t 9 (2016) 335–342
342 Grabs
 1753318x, 2016, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jfr3.12217 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [12/03/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
