[[PAGE 1]]
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Beyond ‘just’ flood risk management: the potential
for—and limits to—alleviating flood disadvantage
Paul O’Hare1 & Iain White2
Received: 29 July 2016 / Accepted: 23 August 2017 / Published online: 12 September 2017
# Springer-V erlag GmbH Germany 2017
Abstract The threat of flooding poses a considerable chal-
lenge for justice. Not only are more citizens becoming ex-
posed to risk, but they are expected to play increasingly active
roles in flood risk management. However, until recently, few
efforts have charted broader understandings of disadvantage
relating to flood risk exposure. Drawing upon social science
scholarship that has long been sensitive to concerns related to
justice, we deploy and develop the notion of flood disadvan-
tage as a means to assess the challenges to more ‘just’ flood
risk management. We contend that the concept of flood dis-
advantage offers a useful lens to appreciate the constraints of
technical approaches to flood risk management, in particular,
its limited ability to incorporate complex social elements such
as how individuals have differing vulnerabilities and sensitiv-
ities to flooding and uneven abilities to engage with risk
agendas. The notion highlights the compounding interactions
between flooding and other social disadvantages across mul-
tiple public policy areas and scales. We argue a fuller ac-
knowledgement of the socio-spatial-temporal dimensions of
intersecting disadvantages can help sensitise technical risk
analyses that tend to see people and communities as homoge-
neous entities in a given spatiality. In doing so we can better
reveal why some individuals or communities are more vulner-
able to disasters or are slower to recover than others. Finally,
we outline the challenges in turning more ‘just’ flood risk
management from an abstract notion into one that could in-
form future practice.
Keywords Flood risk management . Justice . Vulnerability
and sensitivity . Flood disadvantage
Introduction
Advances in conceptual understandings of risk have helped
disassemble the phenomena, recognising its multifarious and
intricately connected elements. Risk and—of particular inter-
est to this paper —flood risk is not solely dependent upon
relative spatial proximity to a hazard such as a coastline, a
river or flood plain. Rather, sensitivity and vulnerability to
hazards are increasingly acknowledged as crucial to under-
standing risk in a holistic sense, not least as a means to explain
why certain communities and individuals are more affected
than others (see Krellenberg et al, 2016). Y et while the rapid
development of maps, models and tools over the last two
decades has greatly aided decision-making, their propensity
to abstract and to aggregate means they will inevitably strug-
gle to capture fine-grained differences between affected pop-
ulations, particularly those that are rooted in more complex
societal disadvantage stemming from outside the flood risk
arena. This issue has gained more resonance recently, given
the gradual transition toward the responsibilisation of actors
beyond the state for managing flooding. As part of this agen-
da, citizens and communities are warned to expect more fre-
quent flooding and are expected to assume greater responsi-
bility for managing their own risk. Clearly, however, the ex-
periences of flooding are very uneven —not just in terms of
spatial exposure, but also regarding the ability of people to
recover or to meaningfully engage in risk agendas.
* Paul O’Hare
Paul.A.OHare@mmu.ac.uk
Iain White
iain.white@waikato.ac.nz
1 Manchester Metropolitan University, Room 415, John Dalton East,
M15 6BH, Manchester, UK
2 University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand
Reg Environ Change (2018) 18:385–396
DOI 10.1007/s10113-017-1216-3


[[PAGE 2]]
Although there is a long legacy of studies concerning the
complexity of spatial justice (e.g. Young, 1990; Fainstein,
2011) and an emerging appreciation of the links between
flooding and justice (Penning-Rowsell and Pardoe 2012;
Begg et al. 2015; Thaler and Hartmann 2016), other sources
of critical research emphasise how predominately technical
risk management decision-making frameworks struggle to
be reconciled with the political economy within which they
reside. For example, Lane ( 2014) demonstrates how the con-
structivist tendencies of hydrological modelling do not just
represent the world, but how their assumptions and bound-
aries have hidden transformative influences. Other research
highlights the political dimensions of technical practices, such
as how they may be used to defend the reputational risk to
institutions (Porter and Demeritt2012; Kuklicke and Demeritt
2016). White and Haughton ( 2017) further interrogate the
shaping influences of tools and methods, such as models,
maps and cost-benefit analyses, arguing that their selection
and application have a structuring effect that creates and main-
tains certain ‘hazardscapes’. Put differently, as a corollary of
technically oriented approaches becoming the convention for
risk management, their limits, boundary effects, contradic-
tions and politics are now receiving more academic attention.
This paper is similarly positioned. We contribute to this debate
by linking risk management approaches to the broader societal
factors and conditions that influence flood risk, in particular,
how the vulnerability of people is affected by multiple public
policy areas. To this end, we adopt and develop the notion of
flood disadvantage (Lindley et al. 2011), arguing how it can
better reveal the array of compounding social, demographic
and economic contexts that both produce, and are produced
by, flooding.
The study of flood disadvantage lies at the intersection
between hazard research and a recognition of the divergent
capacity of citizens to cope and recover from flooding. This
paper outlines how the concept offers a more sophisticated
appreciation of how flood risk intersects with wider contextual
social factors affecting citizens. Moreover, the paper notes an
enduring tension between technical and social dimensions of
flooding and of the construction of managerial and political
boundaries. It does this in three ways: first, it extends the
debate concerning the limits of flood risk management policy
and practice by outlining the limited way that social elements
(and by extension justice) are treated by technical approaches
that tend to aggregate and homogenise populations.
Individuals and communities have very distinct vulnerabilities
and sensitivities to hazards, and there is unevenness in the
ability to engage with, and respond to, threats such as
flooding. Second, it facilitates deeper understandings of com-
plexity debates, emphasising not just how risk is dynamic—it
cascades across space and time —but also how it is linked to
other fluid socio-economic, demographic and spatial charac-
teristics that are often far removed from hazard exposure.
Thirdly, it helps demonstrate how flood risk can exacerbate
these other disadvantages, and how disadvantage can itelf
accentuate flood risk.
In essence, flood disadvantage can be used to demonstrate
how the ability to respond to and recover from flood risk is
highly uneven, contextual and intertwined with other social
disadvantages. Disadvantage in this sense moves far beyond
typical vulnerability analyses. Rather, it is produced and
reproduced through markets, institutions and decision-
making processes spanning an array of policy and practice
agendas. Ultimately, it highlights how more integrated and
co-ordinated public policy responses can help offset the tech-
nical mask and social blindness of much flood risk practice.
Contemporary flood risk and flood risk management
The evolving flood risk challenge
The threat posed by flooding is a growing national and
international concern. It is now considered to be one of the
most pressing ‘natural’ hazards in Europe (CRED 2009)w i t h
a consensus that it will only intensify in coming years
(Committee on Climate Change 2015;I P C C2014). Beyond
an increase in the frequency and severity of flooding, there has
been an expansion in the number of people exposed as climate
change and urbanisation change precipitation patterns and the
behaviour of receiving catchments (Zevenbergen et al. 2010).
The economic and social consequences of flooding are
immense. Data for the period 2000 –2016 (EM-DA T,2016 -
disaster profile summary data) suggest that across the conti-
nent of Europe, flooding
1 caused 1747 fatalities and‘affected’
over 6.5 million people. Direct economic losses in the same
period approached $100 billion. Globally, in the same period,
flooding has killed an estimated 94,000 people and ‘affected’
almost 1.5 billion people (ibid.).
It has been noted that flood exposure increases in a
cumulative fashion, driving an upward trend in people at
risk (White and Howe 2002; Scott et al. 2013). Significantly,
communities not presently at substantial risk might have it
heightened in the future, not least given changing risk
catalysts associated with climate change, urbanisation and
demographic change. This issue inevitably links to deeper
concerns regarding the links between hazards and
intergenerational justice (Stern Review 2007; Cooper and
McKenna 2008), demonstrating how flood risk evolves both
spatially and temporally.
Considerable research and investment have focused on in-
creasing technical expertise in risk assessing, for example
using advanced cartographical and modelling techniques to
1 In this instance, ‘flood’ is defined by the database as encompassing coastal,
riverine, flash and ice jam flooding.
386 P. O’Hare, I. White

[[PAGE 3]]
identify the distribution, or spatiality, of flood exposure. Here,
modelling typically depicts the potential for inundation, with
hazard maps delineating water depth and return periods into
areas of varying exposure, which are usually, though not al-
ways, made available to the public in an effort to improve
awareness of risk. This scientific knowledge also informs de-
cision-making, most notably through spatial planning and
flood risk management schemes. Similarly, effort has been
expended to understand the complex factors underlying in-
creased flood risk exposure. Urbanisation, limited infrastruc-
ture maintenance, certain riparian and catchment level land
management practices and poor planning practice have all
been cited as forces driving flood risk (White 2010;
Zevenbergen et al. 2010). Efforts to understand these catalysts
have fostered new systemic approaches to manage flood risk.
These include holistic source-pathway-receptor approaches
(Evans et al. 2004), adopting catchment initiatives (European
Commission2007) or co-ordinating schemes that complement
hard drainage infrastructure with ‘natural’ measures to slow
water movements (White and Alarcon 2009).
The dynamic nature of flood risk management is demon-
strated by how academics, consultants and public authorities
continuously develop flood risk mapping and modelling. For
instance, flood risk assessments and maps are frequently up-
dated or refined often in light of new data generated during
and after a flood event. These iterations —we hope—evolve
more accurate and precise maps and models. However, this
‘evolution’ also reveals a critical political economy that aca-
demic literature is beginning to highlight. Any model or
map—like all abstractions of the ‘real world’—contains sig-
nificant assumptions and uncertainty and so are political in
nature (Gustafson 2015;H a r l e y1989; Hall and Solomatine
2008;K i t c h e n2014). However, alterations to models and
maps tend to take place in a largely opaque technical manner,
and people previously considered‘safe’ may be re-categorised
as ‘at risk ’ with little opportunity for discussion. Technical
knowledge may also struggle to convey uncertainty and
complexity (Bell et al. 2014;L a n e 2014), particularly to
decision-makers who may demand a ‘false precision ’.
Consequently, caveated, nuanced and detailed information
is often reduced to a simple line on a map or a probabilistic
figure (White 2013). Beyond maps and models, other risk
management practices have their own calculative rationali-
ties for assigning levels of risk within bounded geogra-
phies, such as cost-benefit calculations for territorial units.
Assigning an economic lens to costs and benefits in this
manner conforms to the apparent preference of many
policymakers for economic approaches that provide ‘law-
like regularities ’ to simplify complexity (O ’Neill 2001:
487). Inevitably, there are associated implications for the
application of economic tools that aggregate buildings or
ho
uses into neat cost-benefit analyses without considering
the sensitivities and capabilities of those that inhabit these
areas, or indeed of the many other factors that compose the
full risk profile of places facing flooding.
Living with risk—responsibility for contemporary flood
risk management
Partly in recognition of the expansion and normalisation of
flood risk, initiatives that encourage citizens to assess their
exposure to flooding and to foster the ability of people to cope
and to recover in the wake of flood events are mooted as a key
method of contemporary risk management. Additionally, as
with other realms of public administration and governance
in post-industrial economies, this transition entails significant
alterations in the roles envisaged for citizens and communi-
ties. The broader scope of this approach means stakeholders
are wide and varied, including governments, utility and infra-
structure bodies, citizens, technical experts and planners.
Societies must now, it is contended, adapt to live with risk,
or in other words, become resilient (Adger et al. 2006).
Engagement and participatory practices comprise a central
dimension of these trends (Coaffee and Lee 2016), forming
broader strategies to expand risk management from being un-
der the aegis of the state to be the concern of those exposed to
risk. Notably, these alterations have been catalysed by broader
trends in public administration, where, for example, notions of
resilient citizens highlight how civil engagement can improve
preparedness and adaptation (O ’Brien et al. 2009; Cabinet
Office 2011).
Against this context, the escalating impacts of flooding com-
b i n e dw i t ha ni n c r e a s i n ga p p r e c iation of wider socio-technical
contexts have catalysed a discer nible shift in the tenor of re-
sponse to flood risk, usually understood as a transition from
flood defence to flood risk management (Johnson et al. 2005;
Butler and Pidgeon 2011). Consequently, and given the uncer-
tainty surrounding flood risk, policy in many national contexts
advises that complete protection against flooding is impossible.
Non-structural measures such as planning policy, insurance
programmes or the publication of online risk maps that may
engender behavioural change have become integral to flood
risk management (European Commission2007). Flood gover-
nance is, therefore, now considered to be a more democratic
and co-ordinated exercise, changing methodologies of science
and politics to empower people (Jasanoff2004). In this regard,
flood risk management mirrors efforts to promote stakeholder
engagement in environmental management (Eden et al.2006),
whilst research emphasises the inter-scalar dimensions of flood
risk management, from institutions to individual citizens (Pahl-
Wostl 2009; Thaler and Levin-Keitel2016).
Initiatives have ‘responsibilised’ citizens and communities
who have assumed, or have been charged with assuming,
enhanced roles in the management of exposure to flood risk
(Johnson and Priest 2008; Thaler and Priest 2014). Particular
emphasis is placed on the value of engaging local people with
Beyond ‘just’ flood risk management: the potential for—and limits to—alleviating flood disadvantage 387

[[PAGE 4]]
no professional responsibility for managing flooding
(Bracken et al. 2016). Plans are subjected to extensive consul-
tation exercises; whilst in areas where flooding has taken
place, groups representing the views of local people (e.g. flood
action groups) are established. Consequently, a myriad of new
opportunities for civil participation has emerged across all
stages of flood risk management: preparation, response, re-
covery and mitigation (Wehn et al. 2015). These efforts are
characterised by partnership building and collaborative ef-
forts, re-articulating those exposed to hazards not as merely
vulnerable to flooding, but as agents of flood risk management
(O’Hare et al. 2016).
As suggested, participation and engagement are often fa-
cilitated through new governance and institutional structures
for flood management, including innovative participatory and
knowledge co-production techniques (White et al. 2010;
Landström et al. 2011; Lane et al. 2011; Thaler and Priest
2014; White et al. 2016). This has been embedded within
broader public policies that implore citizens to accept the in-
evitably of flooding: to ‘live’ with water (Department of
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 2005)o rt om a k e
‘room’ for rivers (Ministry of Transport, Public Works and
Water Management 2006;R u i m t ev o o rd eR i v i e r2012).
Critically, these efforts bring significant governance chal-
lenges (Penning-Rowsell and Johnson 2015). Planning and
decision-making authorities rarely correspond with catch-
ments or other administrative jurisdictions, and there are un-
easy ‘borders’ between stakeholders with different training,
experience and organisational priorities (Bracken et al.
2016). Moreover, in the wake of floods with significant im-
pacts, post-event inquiries tend to isolate the climatic, techni-
cal and engineering dimensions of disasters in an effort to
explain why flooding occurred. Such efforts, however, have
been critiqued for generating unproductive institutional
‘blame games’ that reoccur after each event, with limited sub-
stantial change (Haughton and White 2016).
This section has highlighted how flood risk is dynamic and
evolves across time, with variable implications across popu-
lations and places (Pitt Review 2008; Douglas et al. 2010;
Houston et al. 2011). It has also discussed how flood risk
has become normalised whilst its range of actors and agencies
has expanded beyond the state to include citizens themselves.
We further emphasise the political choices imbued in model-
ling and mapping work where resources may be allocated
according to technical parameters which, while an inevitable
corollary of decision-making practices, may not be cognisant
of how certain communities or individuals are less able to
cope with climate extremes than others (Lindley et al. 2011).
We contend that recognising the real-world social contexts
relating to this uneven distribution of justice can help to soften
the technical mask of flood risk management. This is a nor-
mative stance, but as this section has emphasised, so is the
current situation. Despite the seemingly objective and
technical mask of flood risk management, political choices
permeate processes, from the methodology selected, to the
allocation of resources, and increasingly now to the
responsibilisation of citizens.
‘Mapping’ the contours of flood disadvantage
The discussion of the science and practice of flood risk thus far
emphasises that it is derived from a multiplicity of complex
social and technical drivers, many of which are deeply em-
bedded in society. Moreover, it is apparent that altered con-
texts of the governance of flood risk have significant implica-
tions for the public in terms of who is subjected to future
exposure and how communities and citizens are expected to
participate in risk management. This has real implications for
people and places, not just given the variegated capacity to
respond to a flood event or to cope with living with flood risk,
but also as there is an uneven ability to engage with state-led
risk discourses.
The term ‘climate disadvantage’ was recently developed in
an effort to capture the nuances of risk, illustrating how hazard
exposure, social vulnerability and the capacity to respond
have intricate geographies (Lindley et al. 2011,p 7 ) .C l i m a t e
disadvantage can be demonstrated through the fusion of a
diagnosis of hazard-exposure—in particular ‘heat’ or ‘flood’
exposure—and more deeper assessments of socio-spatial vul-
nerability. Specifically, climate disadvantage is defined as a
function of (a) the likelihood and degree of exposure to a
hazard and (b) individual or group vulnerability with regard
to such hazards (ibid.). In a more generic sense, the term
‘corrosive disadvantage’ (Wolff and de Shalit 2007)p r o v i d e s
a wider perspective to demonstrate how complex social fac-
tors compound inequalities and injustices. Such accounts can
help us better appreciate how flood disadvantage is contextu-
al, pluralistic and complex. Flood risk is rooted in and corre-
lated with society more generally, rather than unilaterally and
discretely related to the outcomes of specific processes such as
flood risk management.
In response, studies of both specific disaster events and of
longer-term stresses such as climate change have started to
isolate the intricate variabl es that foster vulnerability.
Detailed empirical studies demonstrate how certain groups
stratified across a variety of economic, ethnic, social and cul-
tural attributes and characteristics, are more exposed to haz-
ards, and additionally, are less able to cope with the effects of
those hazards (Bullard 1994; Cutter 1996; Cutter et al. 2003;
Smith 2006; Elliott and Pais 2006; Werritty et al. 2007). For
example, extreme weather events are likely to have a greater
effect on older people, low-income groups and those with
multiple health problems (see Tapsell et al. 2002; Fielding
and Burningham 2005; V ardoulakis and Heaviside 2012;
Defra 2013). More practically, certain people may have
388 P. O’Hare, I. White

[[PAGE 5]]
limited mobility, meaning they are less able to evacuate from a
flooded area or are unable to move possessions away from
imminent danger or in the expectation of a flood.
Other particularities of living conditions, including housing
tenure and the quality of the physical construction and state of
repair of properties, have an influence on an inhabitant’s over-
all sensitivity to flooding (Thieken et al. 2005; Kazmierczak
and Cavan 2011; Houston et al. 2011; Kazmierczak et al.
2015). More broadly, analytical attention has noted how‘place
inequalities’, including economic vitality and growth rates,
frames social vulnerabilities, providing a useful reminder that
climate change vulnerability is nested within a dynamic land-
scape of social and economic conditions (Cutter et al. 2003;
Walker et al. 2003;Z s a m b o k ye ta l .2011; Howe and White
2002). Others have discussed how recurring flooding, whereby
the same people and places are seemingly trapped in cycles of
flooding or maladaptation, reveals wider societal inequities
that transcend mere proximity to hazards (O’Hare et al. 2015).
Elsewhere, research suggests how, despite advances in
understanding the nuances of flood risk, policy and practice
interventions that attempt to reduce or alleviate flood risk,
can compound and redistribute advantage and disadvantage.
For example, the funding of flood defences has been cri-
tiqued for creating potential ‘winners and losers ’ (Penning-
Rowsell and Pardoe 2012; see also Johnson et al. 2007).
Additionally, policy initiatives can be insensitive to the
specific requirements of the most vulnerable in society
(England and Knox 2015). Without an appreciation of the
varied capacity to cope with flooding, such efforts may
further drive social inequity (White and O ’Hare 2014;
Fainstein 2015) or may even facilitate responses to hazards
that ultimately serve the interests of the powerful and
privileged (Klein 2007).
At this point, it is worth reiterating that explanations of
difference with regard to flood risk (and by extension, injus-
tice) can usefully extend beyond analyses of exposureand the
sensitivity of people to flooding. Adding a third dimension, it
is proposed that the poor and powerless have a reduced ca-
pacity to respond both to generic flood risk and specific flood
events; what has been referred to as ‘triple injustice’ (Walker
and Burningham 2011). By exploring this element of justice,
we can appreciate some of the limits of current standard risk
analysis techniques. For example, even if vulnerability assess-
ments are included, they may not incorporate more contextual
social aspects, such as the ability to engage or the hidden
effect of other public policy changes. Concern regarding the
divergent capacities to respond across society becomes all
the more pertinent given the aforementioned neo-
liberalisation and individualisation of contemporary flood
risk management. As citizens are charged with greater re-
sponsibility for managing and implementing their own
flood risk management initiatives, there is doubt regarding
the readiness and ability —often referred to as the adaptive
capacity—of individuals and communities in meeting this
challenge (Whittle et al. 2010). For instance, certain sectors
of society might lack the resources required to purchase or
ma
intain property level protection and resilience measures
(Bichard and Kazmierczak 2012) or to participate in insur-
ance schemes (Priest et al. 2005;O ’Neill and O ’Neill 2012;
O’Hare et al. 2015). Other citizens may simply be less
aware of their exposure and vulnerability to flood risk
(Fielding 2009) or may be unable to move from areas at
significant exposure.
These studies, focused as they are on people and
communities, help situate the notion of flood disadvantage
against broader contexts . They demonstrate how the
technical emphasis on mapping spatial distributions and
proximity to hazards has dynamic and potentially hidden
redistributive qualities. These social and contextual factors
of flood vulnerability and sensitivity are often overlooked in
conventional distributional analyses that treat those exposed
to flooding as homogeneous entities; aggregations that neglect
to account for the variations in ‘at risk’ populations (Walker
and Burningham 2011; Preston et al. 2011). Y et clearly, there
is an unevenness of exposure, vulnerability, power and en-
gagement, which underwrites flood disadvantage. We ac-
knowledge that this inequity is ever-present. Consequently,
there will always be relative disadvantage. However, two
key questions are posed: first, to what extent do flood risk
practices consider their role in compounding and potentially
mitigating this? And second, how can they extend vulnerabil-
ity and sensitivity research to include more contextual issues
and more effectively acknowledge the effect of other public
policy arenas?
The notion of flood disadvantage could encourage more
nuanced understandings of the effects of flooding to encom-
pass characteristics that may be secondary to flood exposure,
yet are often essential to understanding the distribution of
flood risk in a broader sense. The diverse range of character-
istics that constitute the flood risk profiles of communities,
households and individuals cr eates a complicated milieu.
These characteristics frequently intersect, with some individ-
uals rendered disadvantaged due to several distinct, though
simultaneously related eleme nts of their circumstances.
Policy initiatives in one area will affect vulnerability in anoth-
er. Conventional risk assessments also overlook the devastat-
ing experience of living with the consequences of flooding
and flood risk. Flooding and flood risk may clearly exacerbate
disadvantage in a broader sense by pushing vulnerable com-
munities into greater precariaty in other aspects of their lives.
Despite capturing a broader understanding of the intricate
‘wickedness’ of flood disadvantage, the remainder of the pa-
per elaborates why issues pertaining to the concept have thus
far proven removed from policy. It also identifies some poten-
tial limits of the concept both in terms of its explanatory po-
tential and as an agenda for practical change.
Beyond ‘just’ flood risk management: the potential for—and limits to—alleviating flood disadvantage 389

[[PAGE 6]]
Justice and decision-making—the context
for disadvantage
There is a long history of studies concerning the geographical
and spatial dimensions of justice (Young 1990; Fainstein
2011). Related work on environmental justice similarly
explains the spatialities of environmental burdens and
benefits. It is widely acknowledged that studies of justice
must extend beyond articulations of distributive dimensions
of justice. More explanatory and substantive assessments of
environmental justice have emerged to provide diagnostic and
normative insights that help develop the notion of justice: first,
that people have the right to live in a healthy environment, and
second, that the most socially and economically
disadvantaged lack these conditions (Stephens et al. 2001).
In short, it is often the least wealthy and most marginalised
people in society that tend to live in areas of poorest quality
and are exposed to the most dangerous environmental condi-
tions, or who are least able to deal with environmental threats.
There is a further injustice in that those living in the worst
environments often possess least responsibility for creating
those conditions. For instance, it has been suggested that the
poorest communities suffer exposure to the greatest levels of
air pollutants, but ironically are least responsible for generat-
ing pollution (Mitchell and Dorling 2003).
So, the question of justice regarding flood risk and flood
risk management extends beyond an analysis of where and
who is exposed to flooding or where flood defence and adap-
tion measures are funded. The broader, often cumulative, fac-
tors underwriting how and why certain sectors of society are
exposed to flood risk and differentials in their capacity to
respond to and recover from flooding are emphasised.
Decisions regarding the distribution of environmental injus-
tices therefore stretch far beyond discrete bureaucratic deci-
sions on the use of land or resources or with reference to this
specific paper, flood risk management policy and practice.
They are, rather, nested within multiple layers of decision-
making across the range of social and economic agendas
forming the broad landscape of governance.
Extending this broad body of work, scholars have identified
the forces generating the conditions for injustice, suggesting
that procedural and decision-making dimensions are critical.
Much of the decision-making pertaining to public administra-
tion is essentially about media ting space and resources.
Consequently, it plays a critical role in enabling or mitigating
justice (White 2015). Indeed, much of the initial rationale for
state intervention in decisions such as planning and develop-
ment control claimed to improve disadvantaged communities
(Fainstein2011). For instance, early planning policies and laws
were purported to realise equity and well-being or to protect
against the effects of industrialisation (Robson 1999). Such
insights draw attention to the broader landscape against which
justice and injustice are realised. Certain sectors of society are
exposed to a multiplicity of injustices, some of which are cor-
related to factors and conditions far beyond a flood event or
flood exposure. For instance, distributive dimensions of injus-
tice, such as those readily illustrated by conventional flood
hazard maps, are influenced by broader, often intangible, pro-
cesses such as the machinations of power or the capacities of
stakeholders to participate in decision-making processes.
Today, modern articulations of planning decision-making
claim to take an interest in themes pertaining to diversity,
democracy and quality of life, extending the long-standing
concern with disadvantage and equity. Campbell and
Marshall (2006: 240) explain this further:
BWe regard planning as an activity which is concerned
with making choices about good and bad, right and
wrong, with and for others, in relation to particular
places. It is about making ethical choices over issues
which are often highly contested. Planning is therefore
profoundly concerned with justice.^
Against this backdrop, the planner —broadly construed—
mediates the effects of flooding and of flood risk management,
having the remit, expertise and power to change both the out-
comes and processes of flood risk management policy.
Theoretically, then, victims of environmental injustice of-
ten only have this addressed when they have effective and
meaningful access to the decision-making and policy-
making processes that govern the distribution of environmen-
tal goods and bads. Promoted partly in an effort to alleviate a
proposed ‘crisis of legitimacy ’ of formal institutions
(Habermas 1976), it is suggested that participation brings
fresh perspectives to decision-making scenarios, ensures out-
comes are sensitive to the needs of those that must live with
their consequences and ultimately democratises processes.
Participation has long been a central tenet of formal planning
and decision-making systems across the globe (see Ministry
of Housing and Local Government 1969; Arnstein 1969).
Re
cently, participatory and collaborative forms of governance
have emerged in an effort to embrace previously disengaged
stakeholders in decision-making process, including, but not
necessarily limited to, the public and civil society. In particu-
lar, the discipline of planning incubated the development of a
‘communicative’ or ‘collaborative’ paradigm (Sager 1994;
Innes 1995;H e a l e y1997)i na ne f f o r tt om a k ed e c i s i o n so n
land and resources in the context of increasingly fragmented
societies. Drawing upon the premise of creating‘ideal speech’
situations (Habermas 1984), dialogue and communication are
encouraged, whilst planners act as facilitators to enable en-
gagement and co-operation and ultimately to negotiate con-
sensus. It is envisaged that collaborative planning processes
can challenge articulations of professionals as technocrats,
whilst mutual learning becomes integral to governance.
390 P. O’Hare, I. White

[[PAGE 7]]
Other theorists also advocate meaningful stakeholder and
public involvement in decision-making and in the develop-
ment, implementation and enforcement of environmental
laws, regulations and policie s as key for realising justice
(Bullard 1999: 7). Julian Agyeman (2005: 26) identifies three
strands of environmental justice to elaborate this relationship.
First, ‘procedural’ justice, referring to the ability of people to
be meaningfully involved; second,‘substantive’ justice, relat-
ing to the right to live in a healthy environment; and third,
‘distributive’ justice, relating to the equitable distribution of
environmental benefits. Elsewhere, a similar interpretation
identifies procedural and distributive justice and adds a third
dimension, ‘justice as recognition’, referring to which voices
are respected and who is valued in decision-making debates
(Walker 2012:10). These justice perspectives help emphasise
how political aspects, such as access to decision-making or
notions of power, can affect disadvantage.
However, the realisation and efficacy of participation
varies considerably. Access to —or conversely, exclusion
from—forums of decision-making and the variable capability
and enthusiasm of certain sections of society in engaging with
decision-making frame the nature, extent and effectiveness of
involvement. For example, different authorities have differing
perceptions of citizen participation in flood risk management
in terms of their roles and influence, whilst not all citizens are
able to or have the motivation to participate (see Wehn et al.
2015). Non-participation in decision-making precludes certain
communities and individuals from influencing unfair out-
comes. Conversely, groups with higher levels of education
and better access to resources may be more effective at
influencing decisions (Walker 2012). Appreciating these and
similar such characteristics—and the correlations and causal
relations that govern them —is crucial to understanding the
conditions that produce and exacerbate flood risk.
Given these insights, we contend that disadvantages relat-
ing to flood risk stretch far beyond the spatial distribution of
exposure or the allocation of funds for flood defences toward
how power structures, political actors and institutional
processes may create and perpetuate injustice. Here, the
work of geographers such as David Harvey ( 1996) and Iris
Marion Y oung (1990) provides a useful reference point to link
the spatial dimensions of injustice with the concept of (flood)
disadvantage. Such insights call us to expand discussions of
their distribution or uncritical assessments of disparity to un-
derstand how wider disparities in social conditions are pro-
duced and reproduced. By consequence, diagnostic tools that
help trace the associations and correlations between these el-
ements become essential.
This section has further reoriented notions of risk and jus-
tice beyond spatial exposure to encompass broader distribu-
tions of disadvantage. In doing so, we link disadvantage to the
means by which society regulates and governs space and re-
sources and processes of stakeholder involvement in these
processes. Core concepts pertaining to environmental justice
provide a broader landscape to understand and explain the
dimensions of flood disadvantage. We can, therefore, better
appreciate how flood disadvantage implies a co-dependency
between all of the characteristics that frame vulnerability and
sensitivity to flood risk extending far beyond an identification
of spatial exposure to hazards.
The constraints of flood disadvantage
We have advocated the concept of flood disadvantage for its
ability both to reveal the limits of standard risk analysis prac-
tices and to broaden understanding of less visible factors and
forces that frame flood vulnerability, sensitivity and the capac-
ity of individuals and communities to respond. Flood disad-
vantage is rooted in the perspective that populations are plu-
ralistic, and while standard risk analysis can capture parts of
this, it certainly does not stretch beyond the contexts of
flooding to other public policy arenas or include more nu-
anced considerations relating to engagement or power. As
research further elaborates these insights, we anticipate that
our understand
ing of flood disadvantage will become more
sophisticated. More comprehensive recognition of the interde-
pendent and correlated elements that constitute and compound
disadvantage could help attune flood risk management policy
to the specific threats and needs of those exposed to flood risk.
Despite effort to chart the intersections between social and
economic disadvantage and flood risk, the notion has had only
a limited influence in flood risk management policy and prac-
tice. The first concern relates to how decisions regarding flood
risk are taken. Conventional flood risk maps —particularly
those published by governmental authorities—rarely, if ever,
take account of social dimensions of flood risk such as sensi-
tivity and vulnerability. And even if this was the case, they
would struggle to incorporate wider elements of disadvantage
beyond the more easily quantifiable elements of individual
vulnerability, such as age or disability. They also rarely ac-
count for other aspects of risk, such as property type and
condition, or the existence of small-scale property level pro-
tection or resilience measures, or indeed any of the aforemen-
tioned dimensions that compose flood disadvantage outlined
earlier.
Similarly, many decisions relating to investment in de-
fences are based on a cost-benefit metric that privileges an
aggregated value for money method rather than acknowledg-
ing individual contexts. We propose this is due, in part, to the
technical dominance of management approaches, such as the
efforts of authorities to map and record flood risk and the
demands of decision-makers. Current methods of modelling
and illustrating flood risk, and by consequence flood risk man-
agement decision-making systems, are relatively socially
blind, proving to be useful, although limited, diagnostic tools.
Beyond ‘just’ flood risk management: the potential for—and limits to—alleviating flood disadvantage 391

[[PAGE 8]]
There is also a temporal dimension to this critique, as the
dynamic nature of flood risk intersects with the dynamic na-
ture of disadvantage. Future studies of flood disadvantage
could usefully acknowledge and reflect their limited ability
to capture this complexity; that is, the fluidity of the charac-
teristics that shape vulnerability and sensitivity to flood risk
across time, space and various public policies. It might also
assist the appreciation of the temporal dimensions of flood
risk; how people can be exposed to greater or less flood dis-
advantage across time as their individual, familial and wider
community circumstances alter.
A related concern regards the relatively limited organisational
capacity of flood risk management stakeholders, partic-
ularly given the constraints of managerial and public
policy boundaries touched upon earlier in the paper.
Addressing disadvantage requires a consideration of
contexts and circumstances that, from a governance
and bureaucratic perspective, fall far beyond the pur-
view of the formal flood risk management practices
and policies. Disadvantage in the most generic sense
of the term is produced and reproduced through mar-
kets, institutions and decision-making processes, span-
ning an array of policy and practice agendas. Critical
studies of flood disadvantage may better reveal the hidden
structuring effects and limits of scientific and managerial
flood risk management, demonstrating how people and places
may be overlooked by initiatives that are not calibrated to the
precise needs of those exposed to flood risk. The pursuit of
more ‘just’ flood risk management can usefully, therefore, be
linked to social and economic policies that offer the hope to
alleviate disadvantage in a broader sense. Perhaps this cir-
cumstance may explain the limits of efforts to address flood
vulnerability, sensitivity and capacity building if only per-
ceived through the prism of flood risk management. These
concerns highlight the complexity and challenges in address-
ing flood disadvantage. Without significant reform, iterations
of flood risk management may not only fail to adequately
address flood injustice but given a general blindness to differ-
ence and power differentials and a limited ability to influence
wider social policy may serve to only perpetuate injustices.
A further challenge regards the difficulty in attaining mean-
ingful citizen involvement in flood risk management.
Literature referring to environmental justice advocates com-
munity and public involvement as essential to addressing dis-
advantage. But the trend to reframe vulnerable populations not
as flood victims, but as stakeholders or agents in flood risk
management, is limited. From a superficial perspective,
stakeholder-based flood risk management draws upon the in-
puts of many actors, each with their own vested interests,
adding further complexity and fragmentation to decision-mak-
ing. Whilst policy and academic literature alike valorises par-
ticipation, collaboration and co-production in the practice of
flood risk management, the realisation of this and the
implications of such efforts vary considerably. More critically,
analysts of flood risk management, whilst often great propo-
nents of participation and collaboration in the development of
plans and strategies, are myopic to power differentials and to
the variable willingness and capabilities of communities to
participate. For example, not all citizens have the ability or
inclination to participate (see Wehn et al. 2015), while policy
has often treated the public as instruments of flood risk man-
agement, with discrete, prescribed and ultimately limited roles
(Lane et al., 2011). Elsewhere, others have urged caution
when assuming that local knowledge should be privileged in
decision-making interactions (Haughton et al. 2015).
We must, therefore, examine the extent to which different
‘voices’ and groups are represented in decision-making, their
variegated capabilities to both deal with risk and to contribute
to decision-making and the ways through which participation
may be affected by wider societal forces. Modes of participa-
tion that are emergent in flood risk management practice and
scholarship have been problematized within other disciplines.
Critical planning theorists, attuned to the nuances and intrica-
cies of power, have long warned of the challenges and diffi-
culties posed by this very approach to participation, planning
and governance. For example, collaborative efforts have been
attacked for not taking sufficient account of power dynamics
and relations or for overlooking the intricacies of political and
professional activity (Tewdwr-Jones and Allmendinger1998).
Some powerful actors could use such processes as a further
means to progress their own agendas (Huxley and Yiftachel
2000), not least given the real politick (Alexander 2001)o f
planning in an essentially uncollaborative world (Brand and
Gaffikan 2007). These are critical observations, given the re-
liance upon the ‘capacity’ of communities and individuals and
the increasing emphasis on democratic participation in flood
risk management.
Consequently, both participatory decision-making and the
pursuit of responsibilisation agendas that fail to appreciate the
broader challenges to public engagement in governance may
se
rve to exacerbate rather than ameliorate disadvantage.
Community and public involvement must, therefore, be con-
sidered against the context of disadvantage that frames the ca-
pacity to participate in time-consuming, technical and often
frustrating governance processes. Communities that feel aban-
doned by authorities and overlooked by economic development
before a flood, or any other hazard for that matter, are unlikely
to embrace governance efforts that promise safety and protec-
tion after they and their neighbours have lost their homes and
livelihoods. A corollary of this issue is that certain groups may
be more likely to engage, potentially privileging the influence
of those in society that are less vulnerable to flood disadvan-
tage. Consequently, the participatory dimensions of efforts to
alleviate flood disadvantage requires careful negotiation and
advocacy, stretching beyond the rather narrowly defined remit
of flood risk management decision-making.
392 P. O’Hare, I. White

[[PAGE 9]]
In light of these critiques, and despite the orientation of
recent academic work around social vulnerability, studies
of flood disadvantage have yet to percolate through to
flood risk management practice. We propose that wider
notions of vulnerability are overlooked precisely because
they open debates beyond technical considerations of flood
risk management. Essentially, these are political. Such con-
siderations ask awkward questions about the wider vulner-
abilities of citizens and communities, or stray too far into
the remit of other policy fields.
Given the heightened roles for citizens and communities
within new ensembles of governance we must pay more crit-
ical attention to the ability and willingness of people to engage
in risk management and, by extension, their ability to address
flood disadvantage. Convenient as it is for decision-makers,
the homogenising of populations at risk neglect the personal,
spatial and temporal vagaries of disadvantage and vulnerabil-
ity. Moreover, it overlooks the variegated assets and capabil-
ities found within communities across a spatial area and the
temporal variations of flood risk. Consequently, we propose
that flood disadvantage must be understood as essentially dy-
namic, as a spectrum rather than a categorisation along which
people can move as their circumstances change.
Conclusion
The intricate drivers and effects of flooding have been discussed
at length throughout the academic literature. However, only
recently have we started to fully appreciate the variegated social
impacts of flooding and, by extension, variation in the capacity
and ability to respond to flooding.Considerations of disadvan-
tage provide a further understandings of the nuanced implica-
tions of flood risk and the conte xts that frame sensitivity and
vulnerability of people to flooding, particularly those stemming
from other public policy and due to personal circumstances. The
often devastating consequences of floods are exacerbated by
societal, economic and health conditions, pushing already vul-
nerable people into ever more disadvantage. Moreover, flooding
can compound these other conditions of disadvantage. This,
therefore, poses a dual challenge for those with responsibility
for flood risk management and those with decision-making re-
sponsibility in wider public policy fields that intersect exposed
populations.
As we gain ever more sophisticated understandings of the
correlations between multifarious dimensions of flood disad-
vantage across scales and stakeholders, integrating these per-
spectives will be politically challenging, and in some in-
stances, elusive (Thaler and Hartmann 2016). Such insights
rarely bring the certainty that policymakers, practitioners and
communities crave, exacerbating the‘wickedness’ of the con-
temporary challenge of flood risk management. Against this
complexity, it is understandable that planners and others
responsible for flood risk management have tended to focus
their attention on mapping, modelling and addressing flood
exposurerather than flooddisadvantage.Y e t ,s u c ha p p r o a c h e s
can unknowingly compound flood disadvantage rather than
taking steps that may positively counter it. Additionally, flood
risk management policy and academics increasingly speak
of the need for participation, collaboration and coordina-
tion across stakeholders and scales, valorizing such activ-
ities for democratising flood risk management procedures.
However, social scientists have critiqued the capacity of
decision-makers to catalyse social and environmental jus-
tice through participation and have frequently doubted the
sincerity of such efforts within other public policy arenas.
The provision of more opportunities to participate para-
doxically can favour those with resources, expertise and
time, the very same people who are arguably already well
represented in the processes of public decision-making.
Consequently, we acknowledge that‘Gordian’ questions of
power, legitimacy and authority underpin more ‘visible’ no-
tions of the distribution of goods and bads, or the formal, often
technocratic and bureaucratic, processes of decision-making.
Providing more critical understandings of the contextual, plu-
ralistic and contingent nature of disadvantage will prove to be a
vital step in the reorientation of ‘just’ flood risk management
from being an abstract notion to one that could alter current and
future practice.
References
Agyeman J (2005) Sustainable communities and the challenge of envi-
ronmental justice. New Y ork University Press, London
Adger N, Paavola J, Huq S, Mace MJ (2006) Fairness in adaptation to
climate change. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Alexander (2001) The planner-prince: interdependence, rationalities and
post-communicative practice. Planning Theory & Practice 2(3):
311–324. https://doi.org/10.1080/14649350120096848
Arnstein S (1969) A ladder of citizen participation. Am Inst Plan J 35(4):
216–224
Begg C, Walker G, Kuhlicke C (2015) Localism and flood risk manage-
ment in England: the creation of new inequalities? Environ Plan C:
Gov Policy 33(4):685–702. https://doi.org/10.1068/c12216
Bell J, Saunders MI, Leon JX, Mills M, Kythreotis A, Phinn S, Mumby
PJ, Lovelock CE, Hoegh-Guldberg O, Morrison TH (2014) Maps,
laws and planning policy: working with biophysical and spatial
uncertainty in the case of sea level rise. Environ Sci Policy 44:
247–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2014.07.018
Bichard E, Kazmierczak A (2012) Are homeowners willing to adapt
to and mitigate the effects of climate change? Clim Chang 112:
633–654. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0257-8
Bracken LJ, Oughton EA, Donaldson A, Cook B, Forrester J, Spray C,
Cinderby S, Passmore D, Bisset N (2016) Flood risk management,
an approach to managing cross-border hazards. Natural Hazards
82(2):217–240. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-016-2284-2
Brand & Gaffikan (2007) Collaborative planning in an uncollaborative
world. Plan Theory 6(3):282 –313. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1473095207082036
Beyond ‘just’ flood risk management: the potential for—and limits to—alleviating flood disadvantage 393

[[PAGE 10]]
Bullard R (1994) Unequal protection: environmental justice and commu-
nities of color. Sierra Club Books, San Francisco
Bullard R (1999) Dismantling environmental racism in the USA. Local
Environ 4(1):5–19. https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839908725577
Butler C, Pidgeon N (2011) From ‘flood defence’ to ‘flood risk manage-
ment’: exploring governance, responsibility, and blame. Environ
Plan C 29(3):533–547. https://doi.org/10.1068/c09181j
Cabinet Office (2011) Strategic National Framework on Community
Resilience http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/sites/default/files/
resources/Strategic-National-Framework-on-Community-Resilience_
0.pdf
Campbell H, Marshall R (2006) Towards justice in planning. Eur Plan
Stud 14(2):239–252. https://doi.org/10.1080/09654310500418192
Cooper JAG, McKenna J (2008) Social justice in coastal erosion man-
agement: the temporal and spatial dimensions. Geoforum 39(1):
294–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2007.06.007
CRED (2009) Disaster data: A balanced perspective. CRED crunch,
Centre for Research on the epidemiology of disasters (CRED), issue
no. 17, Brussels
Coaffee J, Lee P (2016) Urban resilience: planning for risk, crisis and
uncertainty. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke
Committee on Climate Change (2015) Progress in preparing for climate
change: 2015 report to parliament, June 2015
Cutter SL (1996) Vulnerability to environmental hazards. Prog Hum Geogr
20(4):529–539. https://doi.org/10.1177/030913259602000407
Cutter SL, Boruff BJ, Shirley WL (2003) Social vulnerability to environ-
mental hazards. Soc Sci Q 84(2):242 –261. https://doi.org/10.1111/
1540-6237.8402002
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) (2005)
Making space for water: taking forward a new government strategy
for flood and coastal management in England. Defra, London
Douglas I, Garvin S, Lawson N, Richards J, Tippett J, White I (2010)
Urban pluvial flooding: a qualitative case study of cause, effect and
nonstructural mitigation. J Flood Risk Manag 3:112 –125. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-318X.2010.01061.x
Eden S, Donaldson A, Walker GP (2006) Green groups and grey areas:
scientific boundary work, NGOs and environmental knowledge.
Environ Plan A 38(6):1061–1076. https://doi.org/10.1068/a37287
Elliott JR, Pais J (2006) Race, class, and hurricane Katrina: social differ-
ences in human responses to disaster. Soc Sci Res 35(2):295 –321.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2006.02.003
EM-DA T database (2016)www.emdat.be/database[Accessed 14
th July,
2016]
England K, Knox K (2015) Targeting flood investment and policy to
minimise flood disadvantage. Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Y ork
European Commission (2007) Directive 2007/60/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on the
Assessment and Management of Flood Risks. Available at: http://
eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ /LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:
32007L0060:EN:NOT(accessed 9th November 2013)
Evans EP , Ashley R, Hall J, Penning-Rowsell E, Saul A, Sayers P , Thorne
CR and Watkinson A (2004) Foresight. Future flooding. Scientific
summary: volume 1 —future risks and their drivers, DTI/pub
7183/2k/04/04/NP , URN 04/939 (London: Office of Science and
Technology). Available at: www.gov.uk/government/publications/
future-flooding
Fainstein S (2011) The just city. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, United
States
Fainstein S (2015) Resilience and justice. Int J Urban Reg Res 39:157–167.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2427.12186
Fielding JL (2009) Double whammy? Are the most at risk the least
aware? A study of environmental justice and awareness of flood risk
in England and Wales. In Samuels, P . Et al. (eds) Flood Risk
Management: Research and Practice, pp. 965–72
Fielding J, Burningham K (2005) Environmental inequality and flood
hazard. Local Environ 10(4):379 –395. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13549830500160875
Gustafson S (2015) Maps and contradictions: urban political ecology
and cartographic expertise in southern Appalachia. Geoforum
60:143–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.01.017
Habermas J (1976) Legitimation crisis. Heinemann Educational, London
Habermas J (1984) The theory of communicative action: vol.1 —reason
and the rationalization of society. Polity Press, Oxford
Hall J, Solomatine D (2008) A framework for uncertainty analysis in
flood risk management decisions. Int J River Basin Manag 6(2):
85–98. https://doi.org/10.1080/15715124.2008.9635339
Harley JB (1989) Deconstructing the map. Cartographica 26:1 –20.
https://doi.org/10.3138/E635-7827-1757-9T53
Harvey D (1996) Justice, nature and the geography of difference.
Blackwell, Oxford
Haughton G, Bankoff G, Coulthard TJ (2015) In search of ‘lost’ knowl-
edge and outsourced expertise in flood risk management. Trans Inst
Br Geogr 40:375–386. https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12082
Haughton G and White I (2016) Groundhog day: the great floods of 2015,
Town and Country Planning Journal, March, 134–137
Healey P (1997) Collaborative planning: shaping places in fragmented
societies. Palgrave, Basingstoke
Houston D, Werritty A, Bassett D, Geddes A, Hoolachan A, McMillan M
(2011) Pluvial (rain-related) flooding in urban areas: the invisible
hazard. Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Y ork
Howe J, White I (2002) The geography of the autumn 2000 floods in the
UK. Geogr: An Int J 87(2):116 –125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.
2017.01.018
Huxley M, Yiftachel O (2000) New paradigm or old myopia? Unsettling
the communicative turn in planning theory. J Plan Educ Res 19(4):
333–342. https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X0001900402
Innes J (1995) Planning theory ’s emerging paradigm: communicative
action and interactive practice. J Plan Educ Res 14(3):183 –189.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X9501400307
IPCC. (2014) Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation, and vulnerabil-
ity. IPCC. Available at: http://www.Ipcc.Ch/report/ar5/wg2/
(accessed 2nd June 2016)
Jasanoff S (ed) (2004) States of knowledge: the coproduction of science
and social order. Routledge, London
Johnson C, Tunstall S, Penning-Rowsell E (2005) Floods as catalysts for
policy change: historical lessons from England and Wales. Int J
Water Resour Dev 21:561 –575. https://doi.org/10.1080/
07900620500258133
Johnson C, Penning-Rowsell E, Parker D (2007) Natural and imposed
i
njustices: the challenges in implementing ‘fair’ flood risk manage-
ment policy in England. Geogr J 173(4):374–390. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x
Johnson C, Priest S (2008) Flood risk management in England: a chang-
ing landscape of risk responsibility? Int J Water Resour Dev 24(4):
513–525. https://doi.org/10.1080/07900620801923146
Kazmierczak A, Cavan G (2011) Surface water flooding risk to urban
communities: analysis of vulnerability, hazard and exposure. Landsc
Urban Plan 103(2):185–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.
2011.07.008
Kazmierczak A, Cavan G, Connelly A, Lindley S (2015) Mapping flood
disadvantage in Scotland 2015. The Scottish Government, Edinburgh
Kitchin R (2014) From mathematical to post-representational un-
derstandings of cartography. Progress In Human Geography,
intro to special e-collection, pp 1 –7 doi: https://doi.org/10.
1177/0309132514562946
Klein N (2007) The shock doctrine: the rise of disaster capitalism.
Penguin, London
Krellenberg K, Welz J, Link F (2016) Urban vulnerability and the contri-
bution of socio-environmental fragmentation: Theoretical and
394 P. O’Hare, I. White

[[PAGE 11]]
methodological pathways. Prog Hum Geogr 41(4):408–431. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0309132516645959
Kuklicke C and Demeritt D (2016) Adaptive and risk-based approaches to
climate change and the management of uncertainty and institutional
risk: the case of future flooding in England. Global Environ Change
37 56-68. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.01.007
Landström C, Whatmore SJ, Lane SN, Odoni NA, Ward N, Bradley
S (2011) Co-producing flood risk knowledge: redistributing ex-
pertise in critical ‘participatory modelling ’. Environ Plan A
43(7):1617–1633. https://doi.org/10.1068/a43482
Lane SN (2014) Acting, predicting and intervening in a socio-
hydrological world, Hydrology and Earth Systems Sciences , 18,
927–952. doi: https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-18-927-2014
Lane SN, Odoni N, Landström C, Whatmore SJ, Ward N, Bradley S
(2011) Doing flood risk science differently: an experiment in radical
scientific method. Trans Inst Br Geogr 2011(36):15–36. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1475-5661.2010.00410.x
Lindley S, O’Neill J, Kandeh J, Lawson N, Christian R, O’Neill M (2011)
Climate change, justice and vulnerability. Joseph Rowntree
Foundation, Y ork
Mitchell G, Dorling D (2003) An environmental justice analysis of
British air quality. Environ Plan A 35(5):909 –929. https://doi.org/
10.1068/a35240
Ministry of Housing and Local Government (1969)People and Planning.
Report of the Committee on Public Participation in Planning [The
Skeffington Report]. London: HMSO
Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management (2006)
Spatial Planning Key Decision ‘Room for the River ’. Available at:
http://www.ruimtevoorderivier.nl(accessed 15
th December 2016)
O’Brien K, Hayward B, Berkes F (2009) Rethinking social contracts:
building resilience in a changing climate. Ecol Soc 14(2):12
O’Hare P , White I, Connelly A (2015) Insurance as maladaptation:
Resilience and the 'business as usual' paradox. Environ Plan C 1-
19. https://doi.org/10.1177/0263774X15602022
O’Hare P , White I, Connelly A (2016) , Insurance as maladaptation:
resilience and the ‘business as usual ’ paradox, Environ Plan C:
Gov Policy 34(6), pp.1175– 1193. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0263774X15602022
O’Neill J (2001) Representing people, representing nature, representing
the world. Environ Plan C: Gov Policy 19:483–500. https://doi.org/
10.1068/c12s
O’Neill J, O’Neill M (2012) Social justice and the future of flood insur-
ance. Joseph Rowntree Foundation, York
Pahl-Wostl (2009) A conceptual framework for analysing adaptive capac-
ity and multi-level learning processes in resource governance re-
gimes. Glob Environ Chang 19(3):354 –365. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.gloenvcha.2009.06.001
Penning-Rowsell E, Johnson C (2015) The ebb and flow of power:
British flood risk management and the politics of scale. Geoforum
62:131–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2015.03.019
Penning-Rowsell E, Pardoe J (2012) Who benefits and who loses from
flood risk reduction? Environ Plan C: Gov Policy 30(3):448 –466.
https://doi.org/10.1068/c10208
Pitt Review (2008) Learning Lessons from the 2007 Floods Available at:
http:// webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100807034701/http:/
archive.cabinetoffice.gov.uk /pittreview/_/media/assets/ www.
cabinetoffice.gov.uk/flooding_review/pitt_review_full%20pdf.pdf
(accessed 12 July 2013)
Porter J, Demeritt D (2012) Flood risk management, mapping, and plan-
ning: the institutional politics of decision support in England.
Environ Plan A:2539–2378. https://doi.org/10.1068/a44660
Preston BL, Y uen EJ, Westaway RM (2011) Putting vulnerability to climate
change on the map: a review of approaches, benefits and risks. Sustain
Sci 6(2):177–202. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-011-0129-1
Priest SJ, Clark MJ, Treby EJ (2005) Flood insurance: the chal-
lenge of the uninsured. Area 37(3):295 –302. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1475-4762.2005.00633.x
Robson B (1999) Vision and reality: urban social policy. In: Cullingworth
JB (ed) British planning: 50 years of urban and regional policy.
Athlone Press, London, pp 168–183
Ruimte voor de Rivier (2012) Available at:http://www.ruimtevoorderivier.
nl/meta-navigatie/english/ publications/ (accessed 15
th December
2016)
Sager T (1994) Communicative planning theory. Avebury, Aldershot
Scott M, White I, Kuhlicke C, Steinführer A, Sultana P , Thompson P ,
Minnery J, O ’Neill E, Cooper J, Adamson M, Russell E (2013)
Living with flood risk. Plan Theory Pract 14(1):103–140
Smith N (2006) There’s no such thing as natural disaster. In: Understanding
Katrina: perspectives from the social sciences. Social Sciences
Research Council, Brooklyn [ http://understandingkatrina.ssrc.org/
Smith/]
Stephens, C., Bullock, S. & Scott, A., (2001) Environmental justice —
rights and means to a healthy environment for all. ESRC
Stern N (2007) The economics of climate change: the stern review.
Cambridge University press, Cambridge
Tapsell SM, Penning-Rowsell EC, Tunstall SM, Wilson TL (2002)
Vulnerability to flooding: health and social dimensions. Phil Trans
R Soc A 360:1511–1525. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2002.1013
Thaler T, Priest S (2014) Partnership funding in flood risk management:
new localism debate and policy in England. Area 46:418 –425.
https://doi.org/10.1111/area.12135
Thaler T, Hartmann T (2016) Justice and flood risk management:
reflecting on different approaches to distribute and allocate flood
risk management in Europe. Nat Hazards 83(1):129 –147. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11069-016-2305-1
Thaler T, Levin-Keitel M (2016) Multi-level stakeholder engagement in
flood risk management —a question of roles and power: lessons
from England. Environ Sci Policy 55(1):292 –301. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.envsci.2015.04.007
Thieken AH, Muller M, Kreibich H, Merz B (2005) Flood damage and
influencing factors: new insights from the August 2002 flood in
G e r m a n y .W a t e rR e s o u rR e s4 1
Tewdwr-Jones M, Allmendinger P (1998) Deconstructing communica-
tive rationality: a critique of Habermasian collaborative planning.
Environ Plan A 30(11):1975 –1989. https://doi.org/10.1068/
a301975
V ardoulakis S, Heaviside C (2012) Health effects of climate change in the
UK 2012. Health Protection Agency, London
Walker G, Fairburn J and Smith G, (2003) Environmental quality and
social deprivation. R&D Technical Report E2-067/1/TR. Bristol:
Environment Agency
Walker G, Burningham K (2011) Flood risk, vulnerability and environ-
mental justice: evidence and evaluation. Critical Social Policy 31(2):
216–240. https://doi.org/10.1177/0261018310396149
Walker G (2012) Environmental justice: concepts, evidence and politics,
London: Routledge
Wehn, U., Rusca, M., Evers, J., Lanfranchi, V . (2015) Participation in
flood risk management and the potential of citizen observatories: a
governance analysis. Environ Sci Policy 48, 225 –236 doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2014.12.017
Werritty A, Houston D, Ball T, Tavendale, A. and Black, A. (2007)
Exploring the social impacts of flood risk and flooding in
Scotland. Report for Scottish Executive
White I (2010) Water and the city: risk, resilience and planning for a
sustainable future. Routledge, London
White I (2013) The more we know, the more we don ’t know: reflections
on a decade of planning, flood risk management and false precision.
Plan Theory Pract 14(1):106 –114. https://doi.org/10.1080/
14649357.2012.761904
Beyond ‘just’ flood risk management: the potential for—and limits to—alleviating flood disadvantage 395

[[PAGE 12]]
White I (2015) Environmental planning in context. Palgrave MacMillan:
Basingstoke
White I, Alarcon A (2009) Planning policy, sustainable drainage and sur-
face water management: a case study of Greater Manchester, UK.
Built Environ 35(4):516–530. https://doi.org/10.2148/benv.35.4.516
White I, Haughton G (2017) Risky times: hazard management and the
tyranny of the present. Int J Disaster Risk Reduction 22:412 –419.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.01.018
White I, Howe J (2002) Flooding and the role of planning in England and
Wales: a critical review. J Environ Plan Manag 45(5):735 –745.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0964056022000013093
White I, Kingston R, Barker A (2010) Participatory geographic informa-
tion systems and public engagement within flood risk management.
J Flood Risk Manag 3:337 –346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.
2014.12.017
White I, O’Hare P (2014) From rhetoric to reality: which resilience, why
resilience, and whose resilience in spatial planning? Environ Plan C:
Gov Policy 32(5):934–950. https://doi.org/10.1068/c12117
W h i t eI ,C o n n e l l yA ,G a r v i nS ,L a w s o nN ,O’Hare P (2016) Flood resil-
ience technology in Europe: identifying barriers and co-producing
best practice. J Flood Risk Manag. https://doi.org/10.1111/jfr3.
12239
Whittle R, Medd W, Deeming H, Kashefi E, Mort M, Twigger-Ross
C, Walker G and Watson N (2010) After the rain —learning the
lessons from flood recovery in Hull , final report for ‘flood, vul-
nerability and urban resilience: a real-time study of local recovery
following the floods of June 2007 in Hull ’. Lancaster: Lancaster
University
Wolff J, de Shalit A (2007) Disadvantage. Oxford University Press,
Oxford
Y oung IM (1990) Justice and the pol itics of difference. Princeton,
Princeton University Press
Zevenbergen C, Cashman A, Evelpidou N, Pasche E, Garvin S, Ashley R
(2010) Urban flood management. CRC Press, London
Zsamboky M, Fernandez-Bilbao A, Smith D, Knight J, Allan J (2011)
Impacts of climate change on disadvantaged UK coastal communi-
ties. Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Y ork
396 P. O’Hare, I. White