[[PAGE 1]]
REVIEW PAPER
Does the environmental inequality matter? A literature
review
Shuai Shao . Liwen Liu . Zhihua Tian
Received: 24 December 2020 / Accepted: 30 March 2021 / Published online: 13 April 2021
/C211The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021
Abstract The environmental inequality theory
reveals that the risk of environmental pollution
exposure varies among regions and groups and that
particular groups face a higher threat of environmental
pollution. In recent years, studies on the environmen-
tal inequality issue in developed countries have been
increasing, while related literature on developing
countries is very scarce. It has been found that some
factors, such as race and economic status, have a close
relationship with the risk of environmental pollution
exposure faced by individuals. For the ﬁrst time, this
paper provides an extensive review of existing theo-
retical and empirical studies on environmental
inequality. We review, in detail, the evolution of the
environmental inequality theory, including the deﬁni-
tion and measurement of environmental inequality.
Further, we provide a systematic refresher on the main
performance of environmental inequality, including
health, education, labor productivity, and real estate
prices. We also identify several causes of environ-
mental inequality, such as ethnic differences, eco-
nomic status, human capital, and household
registration systems. Finally, we discuss prospects
for the future research on this issue.
Keywords Environmental inequality /C1
Environmental pollution /C1Economic status /C1Human
capital /C1Public health
Introduction
Environmental pollution is a principal by-product
generated during the rapid development of human
society and the economy (Li et al., 2021; Shao et al.,
2020). Environmental pollution not just makes an eco-
environment exceed its burden limit, but also results in
high losses in the health and social economy (World
Health Organization, 2019). Approximately seven
million deaths every year can be attributed to ambient
and household air pollution (World Health Organiza-
tion, 2018). It is estimated that the economic inﬂu-
ences of outdoor air pollution, including inﬂuences on
agricultural crop output, health expenditures, and
labor productivity, will cause global economic costs,
which will account for 1% of global gross domestic
product (GDP) by 2060 (OECD, 2016). However, the
pollution burden is not shared equally among all of the
S. Shao
School of Business, East China University of Science and
Technology, Shanghai 200237, China
S. Shao /C1L. Liu
School of Urban and Regional Science, Institute of
Finance and Economics Research, Shanghai University of
Finance and Economics, Shanghai 200433, China
Z. Tian ( &)
School of Economics, Zhejiang University of Technology,
Hangzhou 310023, China
e-mail: tianzhihuas@126.com
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10653-021-00921-2(0123456789().,-volV)( 0123456789().,-volV)

[[PAGE 2]]
world’s people. Developing countries face a higher
risk of pollution exposure and thus bear a greater
pollution burden and losses (Chen et al., 2021;M a
et al., 2018; World Bank, 2016). To date, studies on
environmental pollution and its impacts in developing
countries have tended to focus on examining the
overall situation and regional differences in environ-
mental quality with reference to temporal and spatial
scales (Ai et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020). Conversely,
research on how environmental pollution and social
and economic burdens posed by environmental pollu-
tion are distributed across different residents has been
relatively scarce. This is despite the fact that, even in
the same polluted environment, there has been found
to be a signiﬁcant difference in the degree and
probability of residents’ exposure to pollution (Brulle
& Pellow, 2006; Lanier et al., 2019; Marshall, 2008;
Padilla et al., 2014; Schu¨le et al., 2017). Accordingly,
the issue of inequality in environmental pollution
should arguably receive more attention.
While the history of environmental inequality has
not been long in the ﬁeld of contemporary economics
research, it has recently developed into an important
topic in environmental economics (Schaeffer &
Tivadar, 2019). The relevant research includes numer-
ous topics related to environmental inequality, includ-
ing its deﬁnition, measurement, differential
performance, and causes. The study of environmental
inequality can provide a fresh angle for exploring the
sustainability of economic development and environ-
mental equity, indicating that while considering
economic development, it is essential not only to
ensure environmental sustainability, but also to con-
sider environmental fairness for different groups of
people.
A series of environmental justice movements which
took place in the USA in the 1980s aroused environ-
mental inequality research, which entailed a combi-
nation of raising awareness of environmental pollution
and taking afﬁrmative action. Driven by these move-
ments, people began to pay attention to inequality
issues related to environmental pollution. In 1982, the
Warren County Protest broke out in Warren County,
North Carolina, which was one of the most striking
pro-environment movements (Szasz & Meuser, 1997).
Dominated by African-Americans and low-income
residents, Warren County is one of the most econom-
ically backward areas in the North Carolina. The
government had planned to construct a landﬁll in
Warren County to bury toxic polychlorinated biphe-
nyls (PCBs) from 14 other counties in the state, which
was resolutely opposed by local residents. In total,
more than 500 people were arrested after the protest
began. The Warren County Protest being directly
attributed to the social disparity that environmental
pollution is unequally distributed may be seen as the
earliest movement to link race with poverty and the
environmental consequences of industrial wastes
(Hartley, 1995). In this vein, early studies on envi-
ronmental inequality focus primarily on environmen-
tal racism.
The reports of the US General Accounting Ofﬁce
(USGAO) and the United Church of Christ (UCC)
may be seen as highly representative of the early
research. In 1983, a report issued by the USGAO
indicated that three-quarters of the waste disposal
plants in the southeastern USA were situated near
areas where African-Americans predominantly live
(Burke, 1993). The racial discrimination in the USA at
the time made it impossible for minorities, such as
African-Americans, to obtain the same social status as
whites, thereby placing an unequal environmental
burden on minorities. In 1987, the UCC published the
ﬁndings of its research entitled ‘Toxic Waste and Race
in the United States.’ This study showed that three
ethnic minority communities, including Emille, Scot-
tedville, and Kettleman City, concentrated two-ﬁfths
of the toxic waste sites in the USA, thus producing so-
called environmental racism (Bornstein, 1989).
The key implication of both the USGAO and the
UCC’s studies is that environmental pollution is
mainly concentrated in areas with a large proportion
of minorities, who subsequently bear more serious
pollution exposure risks. A few years later, Bullard’s
(1990) seminal in-depth analysis of race and contam-
inant distribution in the USA,
Dumping in Dixie:
Race, Class, and Environmental Quality , underlines
that, due to long-standing racial discrimination poli-
cies in the USA, a large number of poisonous
pollutants are dumped in minority communities,
reﬂecting the close relationship between race and the
burden of environmental pollution. Figure 1 shows the
evolution process of environmental inequality. Since
the Warren County Protest, studies on environmental
inequality worldwide have substantially increased
over the last three decades.
Compared to developed countries, however, studies
on environmental inequality in developing countries
123
3134 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 3]]
remain at an early stage (Bell & Ebisu, 2012; Smiley,
2019). How to make the burden of environmental
pollution and the allocation of environmental
resources as fair among the public as possible, to
realize a trade-off between environmental protection
and economic growth, has become an urgent issue for
developing and less-developed countries in the pro-
cess of socioeconomic sustainable development. Stud-
ies on environmental inequality undoubtedly play an
important role in tackling these issues. Environmental
inequality not only affects the basic living conditions
of vulnerable groups (Azimi et al., 2019; Hird &
Reese, 1998; Jerrett, 2009; Ouyang et al., 2018), but
also leads to social conﬂicts, such as crime and riots
(Ma, 2010; Samoli et al., 2019). Therefore, the
enacting of any environmental policy needs to take
full account of environmental inequality issues. Given
the current aggravation of environmental pollution
and the enhancement of people’s environmental
awareness, it is imperative for academia to fully draw
on the experience of developed countries and related
research achievements and conduct a systematic and
in-depth study of environmental inequality, so as to
provide the necessary theoretical basis and practical
guidance for the rational formulation and effective
implementation of environmental policies in develop-
ing countries.
The remainder of the article is structured as follows.
We ﬁrst identify the concept of environmental
inequality and suggest ways of measuring environ-
mental inequality, including unit-based, distance-
based, and risk-/exposure-based measures. We then
elaborate on the performance of environmental
inequality concerning public health, education, labor
productivity, and real estate price. We further consider
race, economic status, and other factors that affect
environmental inequality. We conclude by summariz-
ing the key arguments and proposing a future research
agenda.
Deﬁnition and measurement of environmental
inequality
Deﬁnition of environmental inequality
Despite general recognition that environmental
inequality has come to be a signiﬁcant concept in the
ﬁeld of economics (Ferna ´ndez & Wu, 2016; Zhang
et al., 2018), there is currently no real authoritative
deﬁnition of environmental inequality in the existing
literature. As previously stated, environmental
inequality research began with the environmental
justice movement, triggered by unequally distributing
environmental pollution. Subsequently, related studies
have focused on environmental justice (Banzhaf et al.,
2019; Davies & Mah, 2020; Holiﬁeld et al., 2017;
Laurent, 2011; Walker, 2012), which may thus be
regarded as a pioneer in the notion of environmental
inequality.
As deﬁned by a report entitled ‘Environmental
Equity: Reducing Risks for All Communities,’ which
1982 1983 1987 1990
Three ethnic 
minority 
communities
concentrated 
two-fifths of the toxic 
waste sites in the 
USA.
A large number of 
poisonous 
pollutants were
dumped in 
minority 
communities.
EventsResearch results
It was the 
earliest 
movement to 
link race with 
the poverty and 
environmental 
consequences of 
industrial waste.
The UCC published 
the findings of its 
study entitled 
‘Toxic Waste and 
Race in the United 
States’.
Three-quarters of 
the waste disposal
plants in the 
southeastern U.S.
were situated near 
areas where African 
Americans 
predominantly live.
A report was 
issued by the 
USGAO.
Bullard’s book 
“Dumping in Dixie: 
Race, Class, and 
Environmental 
Quality” was 
published.
Warren county 
protest broke 
out.
Fig. 1 Evolution process of
environmental inequality
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3135

[[PAGE 4]]
the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
published in 1992, environmental justice is a term
utilized to denote that environmental interests and
environmental risks are allocated proportionally and
fairly among populations with different income levels
and cultural backgrounds (Dobson, 1998). On this
basis, in 2001, the EPA redeﬁned the environmental
justice, that is, in the formulation, implementation, and
enforcement of environmental policies, regulations,
and laws, in spite of race, color, nationality, or income,
everyone deserves fair treatment and active participa-
tion. Speciﬁcally, fair treatment here implies that no
population, comprising any particular race, minority,
and socioeconomic group, is constrained to bear
unequal pollution exposure due to political or eco-
nomic disempowerment (Mohai et al., 2009).
However, in reality, environmental injustice is
common. Existing studies fail to strictly distinguish
between environmental injustice and environmental
inequality. Environmental injustice emphasizes the
inequality of rules and standards. That is, the fact that
speciﬁc groups have been exposed to more serious
pollution threats owing to the inequality of rules and
standards (Ikeme, 2003). On the other hand, the notion
of environmental inequality underlines inequality in
actual outcomes and focuses on the link between
social inequality and bearing an environmental bur-
den, including any form that results in exposure to a
more serious pollution burden on speciﬁc groups
(Pellow, 2000). Environmental injustice and environ-
mental inequality are usually equivalent, but environ-
mental inequality is arguably a broader concept, given
that it may stem from environmental injustice and may
itself lead to further environmental injustice (Collins
& Grineski, 2019; Grove et al., 2018). Based on the
above studies, we deﬁne the environmental inequality
as that the difference in pollution exposure risks
between social groups in the context of regional
differences in environmental burdens. The differences
in environmental risks among groups are closely
related to their race, color, national origin, and
income, and the minority groups bear more serious
pollution exposure risks.
Measurement of environmental inequality
Undertaking a precise measurement of environmental
inequality is key to conducting relevant research in
this area, particularly empirical research. In general,
three approaches have been utilized to measure
environmental inequality in existing empirical studies:
unit-based, distance-based, and exposure-/risk-based
(Ma, 2010; Schoolman & Ma, 2012). To date, some
scholars have undertaken useful explorations of these
different measures of environmental inequality.
Table 1 and Fig. 2 summarize the relevant represen-
tative literature.
Unit-based method
The spatial unit-based method can be said to be a
classical method used in the study of environmental
inequality, which focuses on examining whether
environmental hazards and geographic unit locations
are consistent, academic circles have thus referred to
this approach as the spatial coincidence method (Been,
1995; Greenberg, 1993). The basic logic is that a
geographical unit (e.g., county, postcode area, and
census area) containing the environmental hazard is
selected as a key sample, and a set of geographical unit
without the environmental hazard is taken as the
control group; then, the existence of environmental
inequality is investigated by comparing the demo-
graphic characteristics between the two groups. A
large number of scholars using this approach have
noted a positive link between communities where
ethnic minorities are concentrated and environmental
pollution.
As shown in Table 1, Anderton et al. ( 1994) used
data samples from US toxic substances treatment,
storage and disposal facilities (TSDFs) and the related
population information to measure environmental
inequality in different geographic units, pointing out
that there were more TSDFs in areas with a larger
proportion of Hispanic people. Daniels and Friedman
(1999) examined the environmental inequality in each
community using the Toxics Release Inventory (TRI)
released by the EPA in 1990 and combining the 1990
US census and county-level commercial model data
samples, ﬁnding that the proportion of black residents
was positively correlated with the release of toxic air
substances. They also note that compared to middle-
income neighborhoods, lower levels of toxic sub-
stances are released in high-income and low-income
communities. Davidson and Anderton ( 2000
) ana-
lyzed how dangerous material treatment facilities
were distributed in space with reference to the
facilities managed by the Resource Conservation and
123
3136 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 5]]
Table 1 Representative literature on measuring environmental inequality
Literature Research idea Research
object
Data
sources
Characteristic or deﬁciency
Unit-based Greenberg ( 1993) Study environmental inequality
in the selection of sites for
unwanted land use
USA WTEFs Focus on examining whether
environmental hazards and geographic
unit locations are consistent
Anderton et al.
(1994)
Measure environmental
inequality in different
geographic units
USA TSDFs
Been ( 1995) Same as Greenberg ( 1993) USA TSDFs
Oakes et al.
(1996)
Study how hazardous waste
facilities are distributed in the
communities
USA TSDFs
Anderton et al.
(1997)
Same as Anderton et al. ( 1994) USA NPL
Daniels and
Friedman (1999)
Examine the environmental
inequality in each community
USA TRI
Davidson and
Anderton ( 2000)
Analyze how dangerous
material treatment facilities
are distributed in space
USA RCRA
Distance-based Pollock and Vittas
(1995)
Study the impact of race on
environmental inequality
Florida
(USA)
ITR Clarify the speciﬁc locations of polluting
facilities and fully consider the proximity
between polluting facilities and the
nearby population
Glickman et al.
(1995)
Study environmental inequality
in low-income and minority
communities
Pittsburgh
(USA)
TRI
Boer et al. ( 1997) Examine the factors affecting
environmental inequality
Los
Angeles
(USA)
TSDFs
Chakraborty and
Armstrong
(1997)
Same as Glickman et al. ( 1995) USA TRI
Sheppard et al.
(1999)
Examine whether ethnic
minorities, the poor, and
children are more vulnerable
to toxic air chemicals
USA TRI
Mohai and Saha
(2006)
Study how demographic
characteristics change with
increasing distances to the
TSDFs
USA TSDFs
Exposure/risk-
based
Ash and Fetter
(2004
)
Study air pollution exposure
among different groups
USA RSEI Quantify the health risks associated with
different types of environmental hazards,
but do not consider mobile pollution
sources
Downey et al.
(2008)
Same as Ash and Fetter ( 2004) USA RSEI
Zwickl et al.
(2014)
Analyze how air pollution
exposure is distributed in
different areas
USA RSEI
Boyce et al.
(2016)
Study the distribution of
industrial air pollution
exposure
USA RSEI
Berman et al.
(2018)
Investigate how air pollution
exposure levels affect student
attendance
Baltimore
(USA)
RSEI
WTEFs are abbreviations for Waste-to-Energy Facilities; TSDFs are the abbreviation for treatment, storage and disposal facilities;
NPL is the abbreviation for National Priorities List; TRI is the abbreviation for toxics release inventory; RCRA is the abbreviation for
The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; ITR is the abbreviation of Industrial Toxic Releases; RSEI is the abbreviation of Risk-
Screening Environmental Indicators
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3137

[[PAGE 6]]
Recovery Act (RCRA) and demographic data sam-
ples. The ﬁndings emphasize that these facilities are
generally situated closer to communities with a larger
percentage of minority residents. In addition, in non-
metropolitan areas, RCRA facilities are frequently
distributed in communities where a higher proportion
of black residents live.
Conversely, other scholars using the same method
suggest that there is no direct correlation between
communities where ethnic minorities are concentrated
and environmental pollution. For instance, Oakes et al.
(1996) used TSDFs’ data samples published in the
1992 Environmental Services Directory (ESD) and
related census data to identify how dangerous waste
facilities were distributed in communities. The ﬁnd-
ings highlight that there is no deﬁnitive relationship
between the communities in which racial and vulner-
able groups are concentrated and environmental risk.
Similarly, Anderton et al. ( 1997) used data samples of
toxic pollution facilities published by the EPA’s
National Priority List (NPL) and relevant demo-
graphic information to investigate how toxic pollution
facilities were distributed across the USA, suggesting
that toxic pollution facilities were not clearly situated
in poor or ethnic communities.
Certain limitations of this method have been
highlighted. On the one hand, it carries the implicit
assumption that residents living in geographic units
with environmental hazards are all subject to the same
degree of environmental risk, ignoring the possibility
that different residents could face different
environmental risks within geographic units. There-
fore, the method fails to reﬂect environmental
inequality within spatial units where environmental
hazards are located. On the other hand, from the
perspective of space, environmental risk varies with
spatial distance within geographic units. For example,
when environmental hazards lie adjacent to the
boundaries of geographic units, people living in
nearby geographic units may face greater environ-
mental risks than people living in other locations
within them (Mohai & Saha, 2006).
Distance-based method
To overcome the disadvantage of the spatial unit-
based approach, some scholars have employed geo-
graphic distance-based methods to measure environ-
mental inequality by mapping the precise locations of
environmental hazards and measuring their proximity
to nearby residents (Mohai & Saha, 2006). This
technique has, in itself, been further categorized. For
example, by summarizing the application process of
distance-based methods, Mohai and Saha ( 2006)
considered that these methods could be divided into
the following three types: 50% areal containment
approach, boundary intersection approach, and areal
apportionment approach.
The premise of 50% areal containment methods is
to ﬁnd environmental hazards’ locations and then
quantify the demographic features of predeﬁned
geographic units determined by a circle at a certain
Fig. 2 Representative literature on measuring environmental inequality
123
3138 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 7]]
distance from these hazards. Nevertheless, since the
geographic unit may actually occupy a large amount of
space, the circle frequently intersects merely a part of a
geographic unit instead of entirely covering it. A rule
of thumb proposed by scholars to determine whether
to regard a geographic unit as falling within the
prescribed circle is to include the former which
overlaps the circle by at least 50% and exclude
geographic units which overlap the circle by less than
50%. As shown in Table 1, based on the 50% areal
containment approach, Mohai and Saha ( 2006) used
US TSDFs and corresponding demographic data
samples to examine how demographic characteristics
changed within different circles of one-mile, two-
mile, and three-mile radius centered on TSDFs. The
result indicates that the percentages of the poor and
ethnic minorities gradually decline with increasing
distances away from the TSDFs.
The boundary intersection method does not exclude
geographic units with less than 50% of overlapping
areas, which is different from the 50% areal contain-
ment method. That is, all geographic units that
partially overlap or are tangential to a circle of
prescribed distance centering around the environmen-
tal hazards, are regarded as the areas under investiga-
tion. By applying the boundary intersection method,
Pollock and Vittas ( 1995) found that African-Amer-
ican families lived in places closer to environmental
pollution sources in Florida. Likewise based on this
method, Boer et al. ( 1997) took Los Angeles as an
example to examine the factors affecting environmen-
tal inequality. The ﬁndings show that poorer commu-
nities have higher levels of TSDFs. That is, a lower
economic status is accompanied by higher degrees of
environmental risk, argued to be because the rich have
more economic and political rights than the poor to
reduce environmental negative externalities. By also
applying the boundary intersection method, Chakra-
borty and Armstrong (1997) employed US census data
samples and the locations of hazardous facilities in the
TRI database, pointing out that more non-whites and
people under the poverty level inhabited areas with
larger levels of TRI.
The areal apportionment approach assembles the
demographic features of all geographic units that
overlap circles of a given radius, like the boundary
intersection method. Nevertheless, there still exist
signiﬁcant differences between the two methods. The
boundary intersection method requires that all
populations in all geographic units overlapped or
intersected by circles of a certain radius centering
around environmental hazards are used for statistical
analysis. Conversely, the areal apportionment method
adds up each geographic unit’s population that is
weighted by the percentage of the geographic unit’s
area that overlaps the circle, as the overall demo-
graphics within circles of a certain distance from
environmental hazards, thereby reducing the risk of
bias that may appear in the estimation of demographic
characteristics by applying the boundary intersection
method. For example, using the areal apportionment
method, Glickman et al. ( 1995) took Pittsburgh as an
example, arguing that people living in minority and
low-income areas faced larger levels of environmental
risk. Similarly based on this method, Sheppard et al.
(1999) drew a similar conclusion using US census data
and TRI data samples to examine whether ethnic
minorities, the poor, and children were more vulner-
able to toxic air chemicals.
The strengths of the geographical distance-based
methods are that they clarify the speciﬁc locations of
polluting facilities and fully consider the proximity
between polluting facilities and the nearby population,
to some extent compensating for the shortcomings of
the spatial unit-based method. However, in practice,
the geographical distance-based method has certain
disadvantages. For example, it only indirectly ana-
lyzes hazards to human health caused by environmen-
tal wastes by studying the distribution of pollution
facilities, regardless of the direct impact of the
quantity or types of hazardous substances emitted by
pollution facilities on people. Therefore, people’s
exposure to environmental hazards cannot be accu-
rately estimated.
Risk-/exposure-based method
Both unit-based and distance-based approaches make
it difﬁcult to quantify the health risks related to various
categories of environmental hazards. The risk-/expo-
sure-based method remedies their limitations (Ash &
Fetter, 2004). The premise of this idea is to use the
EPA Risk-Screening Environmental Indicators
(RSEI) model to identify the toxic air contaminant
concentration near speciﬁc industrial facilities and
further to research toxic air pollution exposure among
different groups in the geographic units. The process
of obtaining air toxic pollutant concentration data
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3139

[[PAGE 8]]
from the RSEI model is as follows: ﬁrstly, relevant
inﬂuences (e.g., exit gas velocity, chimney height, air
turbulence, wind direction, wind speed, chemical
decay, and deposition rate) are comprehensively
considered in order to identify the annual average
concentration of air pollutants per square kilometer
grid unit in each plume model. Secondly, each grid
cell value in the air pollutant plume model is
multiplied by the toxic weight of air pollutants.
Finally, the toxicity-weighted unit values of each air
pollutant grid in the USA are aggregated to establish a
grid database of toxicity-weighted air pollutant con-
centration (Downey et al., 2008).
This method, too, is not without its limitations. For
example, in terms of the types of pollution sources, in
addition to environmental pollution facilities, mobile
pollution sources (such as pollution emissions from
automobiles and airplanes) can also be included as
indicators of environmental hazards (Chakraborty,
2006). Based on the risk-/exposure-based method, Ash
and Fetter ( 2004) examined air pollution exposure
among various groups in the USA using demographic
data samples and the RSEI model, arguing that low-
income people and African-Americans frequently
lived in contaminated communities. Downey et al.
(2008) studied the environmental inequality in the
USA using urban population data samples and the
risk-/exposure-based method, ﬁnding that Hispanic
people and African-Americans often bore larger air
pollution exposure than residents of other ethnicities.
Zwickl et al. ( 2014) explored how air pollution
exposure was distributed in different regions using
USA census data samples and the risk-/exposure-
based method, indicating that African-Americans and
Hispanics underwent higher air pollution exposure
than white people in the Midwest with the most serious
air pollution exposure. Boyce et al. ( 2016) examined
how industrial air pollution exposure was distributed
using census data and the RSEI model for the 50 US
states, highlighting that air pollution exposure levels
were often larger in areas where ethnic minorities were
concentrated. By applying the risk-/exposure-based
method, Berman et al. ( 2018) analyzed how air
pollution exposure affected student attendance in
Baltimore City, ﬁnding that air pollution exposure
had a considerable adverse inﬂuence on this.
In summary, all three methods described above pay
close attention to discussing the relationship between
environmental risk and regional demographic
characteristics based on a speciﬁc scope in order to
verify the existence of environmental inequality,
thereby neglecting the more micro-level aspects of
environmental inequality. For example, even within
the same community, the risk of pollution exposure
may vary greatly for each household. Using census
data and pollution facility data, some new research
directly matches each household or individual with
contaminated facility data to examine whether envi-
ronmental inequality exists at a more micro-level
(Currie, Neidell et al., 2009). Household-level versus
individual-level census data allow researchers to
control more individual characteristics, thereby cir-
cumventing or reducing the estimation bias caused by
a large number of individual-level confounding vari-
ables when assessing environmental inequality.
Environmental inequality performance
Environmental inequality performance, deﬁned as the
differences between the effects of environmental
pollution on different groups, has become a topical
area of research in environmental economics. Numer-
ous scholars have conducted relevant investigations
based on the following four aspects: public health,
education level, labor productivity, and real estate
price. Table 2 and Fig. 3 summarize the relevant
representative studies pertaining to environmental
inequality performance.
Public health
Many studies have found that the most direct perfor-
mance of environmental inequality is that the impacts
of environmental pollution on health differ across
populations (Laurian and Funderburg, 2014; Morello-
Frosch et al., 2011). In particular, some scholars
suggest that infants are more susceptible to pollution
exposure. Moreover, maternal exposure to pollution
during pregnancy can adversely affect fetal develop-
ment (Tanaka, 2015). For example, using weekly air
pollution data, Currie and Neidell ( 2005) examined
how air pollution affected infant health in California,
considering that air pollution had a harmful inﬂuence
on infant health and increased the percentage of low
birth weight and infant death rate and that Hispanic
mothers often inhabited greatly contaminated areas.
Currie, Neidell et al. ( 2009) matched information
123
3140 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 9]]
Table 2 Representative literature on environmental inequality performance
Literature Research
object
Research idea Concerned
aspect
Main conclusion
Chay and
Greenstone
(2003)
USA Investigate the impacts of TSPs on infant
health
Public
health
When TSPs concentration drops by 1%,
infant death rate decreases by 0.5%
Currie and
Neidell
(2005)
California
(USA)
Study how air pollution affects infant
health
Public
health
Air pollution has a harmful inﬂuence on
infant health
Maantay
(2007)
Bronx
(New
York)
Analyze how air pollution affects asthma Public
health
People living close to TRI facilities have
been found to have a probability of
experiencing asthma of up to 66%
Currie,
Neidell
et al. ( 2009)
New
Jersey
(USA)
Same as Currie and Neidell ( 2005) Public
health
Air pollution is more harmful to the health
of newborn children of African-American
and Hispanic mothers
Agarwal et al.
(2010)
USA Study how environmental pollution
affects infant health
Public
health
TRI facilities can signiﬁcantly increase fetal
mortality
Morello-
Frosch et al.
(2011)
USA Study the health effects of exposure to
environmental pollution and
vulnerabilities associated with
socioeconomic conditions
Public
health
Vulnerability of socioeconomic conditions
may exacerbate the health effects of
environmental hazards
Laurian and
Funderburg
(2014)
France Study the locations of waste incinerators
and their impacts on health
Public
health
Harmful pollution facilities can adversely
affect health
Zhao et al.
(2014)
China Analyze environmental inequality among
different groups
Public
health
The biggest victims of environmental
pollution are villagers in rural poverty
regions
Currie et al.
(
2015)
USA Study the effects of the opening or closing
toxic plants on infant health
Public
health
Plant openings have adverse effects on the
weight of newborns within one mile
Chen, Oliva,
et al. ( 2018)
China Study how air pollution affects mental
health
Public
health
Air pollution has the largest inﬂuence on
the mental health of highly educated
people
Pastor et al.
(2002)
Los
Angeles
(USA)
Study the distribution of student
population around dangerous facilities
Education
level
Minority students often go to school near
dangerous facilities
Pastor et al.
(2004)
Los
Angeles
(USA)
Analyze the relationship between school
performance and proximity to
contaminated sites
Education
level
Academic performance scores are
negatively correlated with proximity to
major contaminated sites
Currie,
Hanushek,
et al. ( 2009)
Texas
(USA)
Study how air pollution affects school
absence
Education
level
Higher levels of CO can signiﬁcantly
increase school absence
Mohai et al.
(2011)
Michigan
(USA)
Investigate the relationship between air
quality and student achievement around
schools
Education
level
Enrollment rates are the lowest, and the
percentage of students who do not meet
national education test standards is the
highest, when schools are located in areas
with the worst air pollution
Lucier et al.
(2011)
East Baton
Rouge
(USA)
Same as Pastor et al. ( 2004) Education
level
Academic performance is negatively related
to proximity to major pollution sources
Lavy et al.
(2014)
Israel Analyze how ambient air pollution affects
college entrance examination scores of
high school students
Education
level
PM2.5 exposure is negatively correlated
with the students’ composite scores
during the examination
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3141

[[PAGE 10]]
pertaining to infant mothers’ residences with pollution
data at the air monitoring sites in New Jersey, noting
that each additional unit of CO concentration con-
tributed to an approximately 8% increase in low birth
weight for the last three months of pregnancy.
Moreover, each additional unit of CO concentration
was found to cause an approximate 2.5% increase in
infant mortality during the ﬁrst two weeks after birth.
They also found that African-American and Hispanic
mothers with low levels of education frequently
inhabited heavily polluted areas and that air pollution
was more harmful to the health of the newborns of
these mothers. Using the example of the USA from
1989 to 2002, Agarwal et al. ( 2010) pointed out that
African-American mothers often inhabited communi-
ties near TRI facilities. Furthermore, TRI facilities
Table 2 continued
Literature Research
object
Research idea Concerned
aspect
Main conclusion
Chen, Guo,
et al. ( 2018)
Guangzhou
(China)
Investigate how air pollution
affects student absence
Education
level
Air pollution signiﬁcantly increases student
absence and the effect continues for at least
four days
Zivin and
Neidell
(2012)
California
(USA)
Examine how ozone pollution
affects labor productivity
Labor
productivity
A 10-ppb drop in ozone concentration results
in a 4.2 percent increase in agricultural
worker productivity
Hanna and
Oliva
(2015)
Mexico Analyze the change of nearby labor
input when a reﬁnery is closed
Labor
productivity
The closure of the reﬁnery results in an
increase of 1.3 h in weekly work hours
Chang et al.
(2016a)
Shanghai
and
Nantong
(China)
Analyze how air pollution affects
productivity of telephone
operators
Labor
productivity
Higher levels of air pollution decrease labor
productivity
Chang et al.
(2016b)
Northern
California
Study how outdoor air pollution
affects indoor worker
productivity
Labor
productivity
When outdoor PM
2.5 concentration increases,
workers’ packaging speed signiﬁcantly drops
He et al.
(2019)
Jiangsu and
Henan
(China)
Examine the lagging effects of air
pollution on worker productivity
Labor
productivity
Air pollution signiﬁcantly reduces labor
productivity with 25 days of delay
Michaels and
Smith
(1990)
Boston
(USA)
Study how HWS affect real estate
prices
Real estate
price
HWS has an adverse impact on real estate
prices
Kohlhase
(1991)
USA Study how toxic pollution facilities
affect real estate prices
Real estate
price
Toxic polluting facilities can signiﬁcantly
reduce the prices of nearby homes
Kiel ( 1995) Boston
(USA)
Study the relationship between real
estate prices and HWS
Real estate
price
Same as Michaels and Smith ( 1990)
Ihlanfeldt and
Taylor
(2004)
Atlanta and
Georgia
(USA)
Study the impact of HWS on
commercial and industrial real
estate prices
Real estate
price
HWS have negative impacts on nearby
commercial and industrial real estate prices
Chay and
Greenstone
(2005)
USA Study how air pollution affects
housing prices
Real estate
price
When TSPs drop by 1-ug/m3, housing prices
rise by 0.2%-0.4%
Davis ( 2011) USA Examine housing prices and rents
in neighborhoods near power
plants
Real estate
price
The operation of a power plant reduces the
prices and rents of nearby residential houses
Currie et al.
(2015)
USA Identify the impact of toxic gases
on housing prices using 1600
toxic plant openings and closures
Real estate
price
Toxic plant operations decrease housing prices
by 11 percent within 0.5 mile and negative
impacts persist even after the plants close
TSPs are short for total suspended particulates; TRI is an abbreviation for toxics release inventory; HWS is an abbreviation for
hazardous waste sites
123
3142 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 11]]
signiﬁcantly increased fetal mortality, and carcinogen
emissions from TRI facilities also adversely affected
infant health.
Other authors argue that pollution emissions can
also have a major inﬂuence on the health of adults who
live near pollution sources. Maantay ( 2007) used the
GIS method to identify the relationship between air
pollution and asthma in Bronx, ﬁnding the degree of
exposure to environmental pollution to be higher in
areas where the proportions of the poor and ethnic
minorities were larger. Furthermore, people living
near TRI facilities have been found to have a
probability of experiencing asthma of up to 66%.
Taking China as an example, Zhao et al. ( 2014) found
that the biggest victims of environmental pollution
were villagers in rural poverty regions and that
industrial pollution shifting away from cities to
countryside resulted in the emergence of increasing
numbers of ‘ ‘cancer villages.’ ’
Furthermore, environmental pollution has been
found to affect both physical health and mental health.
For instance, using data pertaining to Chinese urban
residents, Chen, Oliva et al. ( 2018) examined how air
pollution affected mental health, ﬁnding that the
former had the greatest impact on highly educated
people’s mental health, given their likelihood to take
on jobs that require high cognitive skills.
Assessing how environmental pollution affects
public health is susceptible to interference from
confounding variables. On the one hand, the
environmental pollution risks faced by individuals
are closely related to their income, occupation, and
other characteristics. On the other hand, personal
characteristics, such as income and occupation, also
affect individual medical services and environmental
pollution avoidance behaviors, thus affecting their
health status. Confounding variables at the individual
level may lead to an estimation bias. In response to
this, some studies have applied ‘ ‘quasi-natural exper-
iments’ ’ to overcome the endogenous problems caused
by confounding variables.
For example, Chay and Greenstone ( 2003) used
American county-level panel data to study the inﬂu-
ence of total suspended particulates (TSPs) on infants’
health. In their paper, they divide each county into sub-
standard counties (above the maximum limit) and
standard counties (below the maximum limit), accord-
ing to the principle of whether the TSP concentration
exceeds the federal maximum or not. The results show
that TSP concentration and infant mortality decrease
signiﬁcantly and the decline of the sub-standard
counties is signiﬁcantly higher than that of standard
counties because the 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA)
Amendments were adopted from 1971 to 1972. A
further ﬁnding here is that a 1% decrease in TSPs
concentration is seen to lead to a 0.5% decrease in
infant death rate. Currie et al. (2015) used the TRI data
samples published by the US EPA to select residents
within one mile of toxic plants as an experimental
group, and residents within 1–2 miles from toxic
Fig. 3 Representative literature on environmental inequality performance
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3143

[[PAGE 12]]
plants as the control group, using the difference-in-
differences (DID) method for studying the effects of
the openings or closures of toxic plants on infant
health. The results show that plant openings have
adverse effects on the weight of newborns within one
mile; that is, approximately 3% of the possibility of
low birth weight is increased due to the emissions of
toxic substances.
Education level
Many studies have shown that environmental inequal-
ity leads to inequality in education levels, in particular,
that air pollution has unfavorable inﬂuences on
adolescents’ attendance rates and test scores (Lavy
et al., 2014; Pastor et al., 2002, 2004). By endangering
students’ physical and mental health, environmental
pollution causes students to be negatively affected in
the process of acquiring knowledge (Mizen et al.,
2020; Zhao et al., 2008). Currie, Hanushek et al.
(2009) employed the difference-in-difference-in-dif-
ferences method to study how air pollution affected
school absence in Texas, after dominating many
variables, such as schools, years, attendance periods,
precipitation, and temperature. The results show that
Hispanic and low-income students often undergo
higher levels of CO, which can signiﬁcantly increase
school absence. Speciﬁcally, the decrease of days with
a high CO concentration leads to a drop in absence
rates of 0.8 percent, indicating that improving the air
quality has a positive effect on student attendance.
Mohai et al. (2011) examined the relationship between
student achievement and air quality around schools in
Michigan, USA. The results demonstrate that enroll-
ment rates are the lowest, and the percentage of
students who do not meet national education test
standards is the highest, when schools are located in
areas with the worst air pollution. It has also been
found that Hispanic and African-American students
attend schools which are often near industrial pollutant
sources; thus, their educational quality is more seri-
ously impaired by air pollution. Lucier et al. ( 2011)
analyzed the relationship between school record and
schools’ proximity to polluting facilities in the East
Baton Rouge (USA), claiming that school record
declined when there was such proximity. The schools
attended by poor and minority students are frequently
near polluting facilities. In addition, when students
spend most of their time near toxic pollution facilities,
this has been found to be detrimental to the improve-
ment of social productivity by restricting human
capital accumulation. Therefore, policy makers should
seriously consider reducing the risk brought about by
the construction of pollution facilities near schools.
Chen, Guo et al. ( 2018) used data samples on air
pollution and student absences in Guangzhou to
research the effect of such pollution on student
absence by employing the two-stage least squares
approach, considering that air pollution signiﬁcantly
increased student absence and that the effect continued
for at least four days. More importantly, this detri-
mental impact is found to be considerable even if air
quality has met governmental standardization.
Labor productivity
The inﬂuence of environmental pollution on labor
productivity has also attracted the attention of several
researchers. Zivin and Neidell (2012) used a piece-rate
wage from a large farm in California to measure the
labor productivity of agricultural workers to examine
the inﬂuence of ozone contamination on labor pro-
ductivity, pointing out that farm laborers had exposure
to more serious pollution than those working indoors.
Furthermore, they maintain that when ozone concen-
tration drops by 10 ppb, agricultural worker produc-
tivity increases by 4.2%, indicating that air pollution
exposure has evident adverse inﬂuences on labor
productivity. Thus, governments need to promote
economic growth by enacting environmental protec-
tion policies to raise worker productivity. Hanna and
Oliva ( 2015) analyzed how the nearby labor input
changed when a large-scale reﬁnery was closed in
Mexico, suggesting that the closure of the reﬁnery
resulted in a 19.7 percent drop in sulfur dioxide
concentration in the surrounding communities and an
increase of 1.3 h in weekly work hours.
Air pollution also has an important effect on indoor
worker productivity. On the one hand, indoor workers
are exposed directly to air pollution, which penetrates
buildings. On the other hand, by impairing respiratory
organs, air pollution leads to a decline in indoor
worker productivity. Chang et al. (2019) analyzed how
air pollution affected telephone operators’ productiv-
ity by taking the call center of Ctrip (Xiecheng) in
Shanghai and Nantong, China, as an example. The
authors maintain that by reducing the number of
wirings that the operator completes every day, higher
123
3144 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 13]]
levels of air pollution can reduce labor productivity.
Taking Northern California as an example, Chang
et al. ( 2016) analyzed how outdoor air contamination
affected indoor workers’ productivity based on a
dataset from a large-scale pear-packing plant, ﬁnding
that the increment in outdoor PM 2.5 concentration
caused an evident decrease in workers’ packaging
speed. He et al. ( 2019) used data samples from two
textile factories located in Jiangsu province and Henan
province, respectively, to identify the lagging effects
of air contamination on worker productivity, ﬁnding
that air contamination signiﬁcantly reduced worker
productivity with 25 days of delay.
Real estate price
Existing studies have demonstrated that environmen-
tal inequality also manifests in the impacts of
environmental pollution on real estate prices. By
damaging residents’ quality of life, environmental
pollution reduces real estate prices (Chen et al., 2013;
Le Boennec & Salladarre´, 2017). Several researchers
have found that toxic polluting facilities appearing on
EPA’s National Priority List (NPL) signiﬁcantly
decrease nearby residential housing prices (Kiel,
1995; Kohlhase, 1991; Michaels & Smith, 1990).
For example, Ihlanfeldt and Taylor ( 2004) used
data samples from Atlanta and Georgia to study how
hazardous waste sites (HWS) affected commercial and
industrial real estate prices, noting that HWS had
negative impacts on nearby commercial and industrial
real estate prices. Chay and Greenstone ( 2005)
analyzed how air pollution affected housing prices
using the US county-level dataset, ﬁnding that the
CAA regulations had signiﬁcantly ameliorated air
quality and that when TSPs dropped by 1-ug/m
3,
housing prices rose by 0.2%-0.4%. Davis ( 2011)
examined housing prices and rents in communities
near power stations operating in America, pointing out
that low-income and low-educated people often lived
close to power plants. In addition, compared with
communities with analogous housing and demograph-
ics, housing prices and rents within two miles of power
plants were found to decrease by 3%-7%, while
housing prices and rents within one mile experienced a
larger decrease. Currie et al. ( 2015) used 1600 toxic
plant openings and closures to recognize how toxic
gases affected housing prices in America. Based on the
DID method, the authors divide the relevant areas into
those close to toxic plants (within 1 mile) and areas far
from toxic plants (1–2 miles). The results show that
toxic plant operations decrease housing prices by 11
percent within 0.5 miles and that these negative
impacts persist even after the plants close.
In general, studies to date show that environmental
pollution exerts impacts on public health, education,
labor productivity, and real estate prices, thereby
manifesting environmental inequality to varying
degrees. A key gap that the current paper has identiﬁed
here is that the existing research focuses on providing
the empirical evidence for environmental inequality
performance, without an in-depth discussion of the
underlying mechanisms, including the questions of
how and under what conditions environmental inequal-
ity produces different performance. Therefore, while
examining the differential performance of environ-
mental inequality, a key and beneﬁcial future research
direction would be to explore the function mechanisms
and occurrence conditions of this inequality.
Factors affecting environmental inequality
With the growth of the public’s environmental
awareness and the gradual enhancement of self-
protection consciousness of all social strata, the issue
of environmental inequality has attracted increasing
attention from scholars. What are the factors that lead
to environmental inequality? Existing studies have
shown that race, economic status, and other factors can
have signiﬁcant effects on environmental inequality
(Ash & Fetter, 2004; Tonne et al., 2018). Table 3,
Figs. 4 and 5 summarize representative studies of the
causes of environmental inequality.
Racial difference
As previously discussed, the notion of environmental
inequality originates from the US race movement,
with the initial research focusing on the relationship
between different ethnic agglomeration areas and the
distribution of toxic waste treatment plants (Rinquist,
1997). To date, numerous scholars have studied the
cause of environmental inequality from the perspec-
tive of racial difference. Most authors believe that race
is a crucial factor which leads to environmental
inequality. In other words, minorities frequently face
environmental risks, especially African-Americans.
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3145

[[PAGE 14]]
Table 3 Representative literature on the causes of environmental inequality
Literature Research
object
Inﬂuencing
factor
Main conclusion
Anderton et al.
(1994)
USA Racial
difference
Different regions that have established TSDFs or have not are no remarkable
differences in ethnic composition
Oakes et al.
(1996)
USA Racial
difference
TSDFs are not signiﬁcantly more located in minority communities
Anderton et al.
(1997)
USA Racial
difference
The distribution of toxic waste treatment plants has little relation to ethnic
habitation
Rinquist ( 1997) USA Racial
difference
Toxic waste treatment plants are mainly distributed in ethnic minority areas
Szasz and Meuser
(1997)
USA Racial
difference
Ethnic minorities often face higher levels of environmental hazards
Been and Gupta
(1997)
USA Racial
difference
There is no evident relationship between the distribution of waste treatment
facilities and the percentage of African-Americans in the community
Davidson and
Anderton ( 2000)
USA Racial
difference
Pollutant treatment facilities often locate in working class communities where
the proportion of minority residents is lower
Ash and Fetter
(2004)
USA Racial
difference
African-Americans often inhabit more contaminated cities and more
contaminated communities within cities
Buzzelli and
Jerrett ( 2004)
Canada Racial
difference
Asians and African-Americans do not inhabit communities with severe air
pollution, while Hispanic people suffer from more severe air pollution
Downey et al.
(2008)
USA Racial
difference
Ethnic communities are more prone to experiencing the effects of
environmental hazards than other communities
Chakraborty and
Green ( 2014)
Australia Racial
difference
Industrial pollution emissions are more toxic and larger in communities with a
larger percentage of indigenous people
Knibbs and
Barnett ( 2015)
Australia Racial
difference
Indigenous populations are more exposed to NO 2 than non-indigenous
populations
Ru¨ttenauer ( 2018) Germany Racial
difference
Exposure to industrial pollution is higher in communities with a large
percentage of ethnic minorities
Perlin et al. ( 1995) USA Economic
status
Low-income groups are often exposed to greater environmental risk
Oakes et al.
(1996)
USA Economic
status
TSDFs are not clearly distributed in poor communities
Anderton et al.
(1997)
USA Economic
status
Toxic waste sites do not obviously locate in socioeconomically disadvantaged
neighborhoods
Been and Gupta
(1997)
USA Economic
status
Same as Anderton et al. ( 1997)
Mitchell and
Dorling ( 2003)
England Economic
status
High-income people inhabit communities with lower levels of NO 2, while low-
income people inhabit areas with higher levels of NO 2
Escobedo et al.
(2006)
Santiago
(Chile)
Economic
status
Groups with lower economic status often inhabit communities with poor
environmental quality
Kruize et al.
(2007)
Rijnmond
(Netherlands)
Economic
status
People are vulnerable to air contamination due to their low economic status
Forastiere et al.
(2007)
Rome (Italy) Economic
status
People with higher income often undergo more serious air pollution exposure
Namdeo and
Stringer ( 2008)
Leeds
(England)
Economic
status
Differences in socioeconomic status are the main causes of environmental
inequality
Havard et al.
(2009)
Strasbourg
(France)
Economic
status
Groups with middle economic status frequently face higher air contamination
exposure than other groups
123
3146 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 15]]
Table 3 continued
Literature Research
object
Inﬂuencing
factor
Main conclusion
Ma ( 2010) Henan
(China)
Economic
status
There is a positive relation between income levels and proximity to
pollution sources
Romero et al. ( 2012) Santiago
(Chile)
Economic
status
Groups with lower economic status often inhabit communities with higher
environmental risk
Krellenberg et al.
(2013)
Santiago
(Chile)
Economic
status
Same as Romero et al. ( 2012)
Chakraborty and
Green ( 2014)
Australia Economic
status
Same as Perlin et al. ( 1995)
Knibbs and Barnett
(2015)
Australia Economic
status
Same as Namdeo and Stringer ( 2008)
Barrera et al. ( 2016) Santiago
(Chile)
Economic
status
Same as Escobedo et al. ( 2006)
Tonne et al. ( 2018) London
(England)
Economic
status
Compared to high-income households, low-income families often undergo
higher NO 2 exposure
Verbeek ( 2019) Ghent
(Belgium)
Economic
status
Communities with a lower household income often bear air pollution
exposure
Jerrett et al. ( 2001) Hamilton
(Canada)
Human capital Education levels can be used as a signiﬁcant factor to explain
environmental inequality
Mohai and Saha
(2007)
USA Human capital Same as Jerrett et al. ( 2001)
Mohai et al. ( 2009) USA Human capital People with high education levels often inhabit cleaner communities, while
people with low education levels often inhabit communities closer to
polluting facilities
Ma ( 2010) Henan
(China)
Human capital Same as Jerrett et al. ( 2001)
Schoolman and Ma
(2012)
Jiangsu
(China)
Human capital Same as Jerrett et al. ( 2001)
Anderton et al. ( 1997) USA Population
density
Population density may have an impact on environmental inequality
Noonan et al. ( 2009) USA Population
density
Communities with lower population density often face higher
environmental pollution exposure
Ma ( 2010) Henan
(China)
Population
density
There is a positive correlation between population density and proximity to
pollution sources
Schoolman and Ma
(2012)
Jiangsu
(China)
Population
density
Same as Anderton et al. ( 1997)
Ferna´ndez and Wu
(2016)
Santiago
(Chile)
Population
density
There is no signiﬁcant relationship between population density and
environmental quality
Ma ( 2010) Henan
(China)
Hukou registry
system
Rural residents suffer more serious pollution than urban residents
Schoolman and Ma
(2012)
Jiangsu
(China)
Hukou registry
system
Urban workers with rural hukou may be more exposed to environmental
pollution
Jerrett et al. ( 2001) Hamilton
(Canada)
Unemployment
rate
Unemployed people often bear higher environmental pollution exposure
Bakhtsiyarava and
Nawrotzki ( 2017)
USA Immigration Mexican immigrants tend to stay away from heavily pollution in low-
income communities, while they bear disproportionate environmental
pollution exposure in high-income areas
TSDFs are abbreviations for treatment, storage, and disposal facilities
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3147

[[PAGE 16]]
For example, Szasz and Meuser ( 1997) found that
ethnic minorities often faced more serious environ-
mental hazards in America. Ash and Fetter ( 2004)
used data samples from the EPA’s RSEI and related
urban census data in the USA to examine air pollution
exposure across different groups, maintaining that
African-Americans often inhabited more contami-
nated cities and more contaminated communities
within cities. Downey et al. ( 2008) used data from a
toxic-weighted air pollutant concentration published
by the US EPA to examine environmental inequality
between different ethnic communities in 329 metro-
polises in America, highlighting that ethnic commu-
nities were more prone to experiencing the effects of
environmental hazards than other communities. The
reasons may be that ethnic communities are short of
political rights to shut down the facilities that pose an
environmental risk and that racial discrimination in the
housing market limits ethnic minorities to communi-
ties that are not welcomed by white people.
Other countries and regions have also shown
evidence of environmental inequality caused by ethnic
issues. Buzzelli and Jerrett ( 2004) used census and air
pollution data in Canada to examine whether race
acted a major part in environmental inequality, noting
that Asians and African-Americans did not inhabit
communities with severe air contamination, while
Hispanic people suffered from more serious air
Fig. 4 Representative literature on the causes of environmental inequality
Fig. 5 Trends of representative literature on the causes of environmental inequality
123
3148 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 17]]
pollution. Chakraborty and Green ( 2014) used data
samples of industrial pollution sources and related
population information in Australia to study how
industrial air pollution was distributed across different
groups, ﬁnding that industrial pollution emissions
were more toxic and larger in communities with larger
portion of indigenous people. Knibbs and Barnett
(2015) used census and air pollution data samples to
study air pollution exposure among different groups in
Australia, illustrating that indigenous populations
were more exposed to NO
2 than non-indigenous
populations. Ru¨ttenauer ( 2018) used data samples
pertaining to census and industrial pollution facilities
in Germany to study the existence and inﬂuencing
factors of environmental inequality, ﬁnding that
exposure to industrial contamination was larger in
communities with high portion of ethnic minorities.
Meanwhile, a small number of scholars have found
that race is unrelated to environmental inequality. For
example, on the basis of the US census data samples,
Anderton et al. (1994) explored the ethnic composition
of populations in different regions that had established
TSDFs or had not, respectively, pointing out that two
kinds of areas were no remarkable differences in
ethnic composition. Using the US TSDFs data samples
and the related census, Oakes et al. ( 1996) analyzed
the relationship between the allocation of TSDFs and
the ethnic composition of the population in commu-
nities, ﬁnding that TSDFs were not signiﬁcantly
situated in minority areas. Anderton et al. ( 1997) used
data samples concerning harmful pollution facilities
appearing on EPA’s NPL and the related demographic
data to identify the distribution of residents’ charac-
teristics near toxic waste treatment plants, highlighting
that the distribution of toxic waste treatment plants had
little relation to ethnic habitation. Been and Gupta
(1997) used the sample data of demographic and
environmental waste treatment facilities in 544 US
communities from 1970 to 1990, observing that there
was no signiﬁcant relationship between the distribu-
tion of waste discharge facilities and the percentage of
African-Americans in the communities. Davidson and
Anderton ( 2000) used data samples on pollutant
treatment facilities managed by the US RCRA and
the spatial distribution of related population structures,
ﬁnding that these facilities were often situated in
working-class communities where the proportion of
minority residents was lower.
Economic status
Other scholars believe that environmental inequality
mainly stems from differences in socioeconomic
status (Knibbs & Barnett, 2015; Namdeo & Stringer,
2008; Tonne et al., 2018). In general, groups with a
lower economic status frequently inhabit communities
with a poorer environmental quality (Barrera et al.,
2016; Escobedo et al., 2006) and with larger environ-
mental risk (Krellenberg et al., 2013; Romero et al.,
2012). One reason for this may be that since housing
costs are lower in areas with poor environmental
quality (or high environmental risks), such areas may
be seen as more attractive for those who cannot afford
high housing rent (Hamilton, 1995). Perlin et al.
(1995) studied how industrial waste gas discharge was
distributed in the USA from the perspective of
residents’ income disparities, arguing that low-income
groups often faced greater environmental risk. Mitch-
ell and Dorling ( 2003) used air quality data and
relevant population information data provided by the
National Air Quality Strategy (NAQS) in England to
analyze the distribution of air pollution across differ-
ent groups, maintaining that high-income people
inhabited communities with lower levels of NO
2,
while low-income people inhabited communities with
larger levels of NO
2. Kruize et al. ( 2007) examined
exposure to air pollution across different groups in
Rijnmond, arguing that people were vulnerable to air
contamination due to their low economic status.
Chakraborty and Green ( 2014) analyzed how the
sources of industrial pollution were distributed in
space considering the residents’ economic status in
Australia, arguing that the lower groups’ economic
status was, the more seriously groups were affected by
industrial pollution. Verbeek ( 2019) analyzed the
relationship between economic status and exposure to
air contamination in Ghent, pointing out that commu-
nities with a lower household income often faced more
air pollution exposure.
Despite the latter body of research, many scholars
are skeptical of the idea that lower economic groups
frequently inhabit communities with poorer environ-
ment quality (Anderton et al., 1997; Been & Gupta,
1997). For example, Oakes et al. ( 1996) used TSDFs
data samples and related census data to analyze the
relationship between residents’ income levels and
TSDFs’ locations in America. The results demonstrate
that TSDFs are not signiﬁcantly distributed in poor
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3149

[[PAGE 18]]
communities, implying that there is no prejudice
relating to economic status in TSDFs site selection.
Moving beyond the context of the USA, Forastiere
et al. ( 2007) analyzed the relationship between
residents’ income and trafﬁc air pollution emissions
in Rome, ﬁnding that higher-income groups often
faced more serious air pollution exposure. The authors
conjecture that the reason for this may be that higher-
income people who live in cities where trafﬁc is well
developed in terms of convenient travel are, therefore,
exposed to more trafﬁc air pollution.
By utilizing the ordinary least squares (OLS)
approach and the spatial autoregressive method,
Havard et al. (2009) analyzed the relationship between
air pollution and economic status in Strasbourg, noting
that groups with middle economic status frequently
faced higher air contamination exposure than other
groups. This is because, compared with lower-income
people, middle-income people often inhabit developed
communities with convenient transportation, where
air pollution is also more serious; conversely, com-
pared with higher-income people, middle-income
people cannot afford to live away from pollution.
Thus, middle-income people bear the greatest air
pollution exposure. Ma (2010) studied the relationship
between the distribution of industrial contamination
sources and residents’ income in Henan province in
China. The author maintains that there is a positive
relationship between income levels and proximity to
contamination sources, in turn indicating that people
who receive greater economic beneﬁts from industrial
production are the ones who suffer from more serious
environmental pollution. The reason here may be that
high-income people tend to live near their work place,
or that they are reluctant to move due to the traditional
Chinese native complex.
Human capital and population density
The impact of human capital on environmental
inequality has attracted the attention of some scholars.
The core idea is that education levels can be used as a
signiﬁcant factor to explain environmental inequality
(Jerrett et al., 2001; Ma, 2010; Mohai & Saha, 2007;
Schoolman & Ma, 2012). The reasoning here is that,
on the one hand, by affecting people’s social and
economic status, education levels have an effect on
environmental inequality. On the other hand, educa-
tion levels can affect individuals’ environmental
cognition. Individuals with high levels of education
attainment often adopt positive environmental risk
avoidance behavior due to a better understanding of
the harmfulness of environmental pollution (Mohai
et al., 2009). On the basis of the logistic model, Mohai
et al. ( 2009) used TRI data samples published by the
US EPA to analyze the distance between communities
in which groups with different educational levels live
and polluting facilities, pointing out that better-
educated people often lived in cleaner communities,
while less-educated people frequently inhabited com-
munities closer to polluting facilities.
Population density may also have an impact on
environmental inequality (Anderton et al., 1997;
Schoolman & Ma, 2012). Population density reﬂects
the differences in regional natural and social condi-
tions, such as vegetation cover and green infrastruc-
ture, thereby contributing to regional environmental
inequality. Noonan et al. ( 2009) analyzed the distri-
bution of environmental inequality in space using the
data samples of hazardous waste facilities published
by EPA’s NPL, and a logit model, noting that
communities with lower population density often
faced higher environmental pollution exposure. This
ﬁnding implies that natural and social conditions are
likely to be worse in these areas due to the lack of
vegetation coverage and green infrastructure, in turn
leading to worse environmental quality. Ma ( 2010),
however, drew the opposite conclusion from an
empirical investigation of environmental inequality
in Henan province, noting that there existed a positive
relationship between population density and proximity
to pollution sources, namely communities with larger
population density might be closer to pollution
sources, given the greater distribution of polluting
enterprises in areas with a higher population density in
this province. Ferna ´ndez and Wu ( 2016) assessed
environmental inequality by applying a hierarchical
multiscale method in Santiago, suggesting that there
was no evident relationship between population den-
sity and environmental quality and that wealth effects
were the dominant ones in interpreting environmental
inequality.
Hukou registry system
Environmental inequality still exists in developing
countries. Academic research has been conducted to
explore how the hukou registry system affects urban–
123
3150 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 19]]
rural environmental inequality. Ma ( 2010) maintained
that rural residents had suffered more serious envi-
ronmental pollution than urban residents in Henan
province, which could be attributed to urban planning
and national policies. For example, with the increase
in electricity demand, new coal-ﬁred power stations
often are constructed in rural regions, while they are
rigorously forbidden in cities and their suburbs (MEP,
1998). By controlling immigration into and out of
urban areas, the hukou registry system initially
appears to maintain social stability (Chan & Zhang,
1999). However, in reality, this system holds far more
beneﬁts for urban residents than rural residents in
many areas, such as education, medical care, employ-
ment, and cultural activities.
In addition, urban residents may pay more attention
to the surrounding environmental quality, which, to
some degree, raises the risk of pollution exposure for
rural residents (Liu, 2005; Wu & Treiman, 2004). Due
to the surplus labor force caused by China’s economic
reform, a large number of rural inhabitants start
migrating to cities for ﬁnding work, while the
restrictions of the hukou registry system leave rural
migrants in a disadvantageous position (Ma, 2010).
Using GIS technology, Schoolman and Ma ( 2012)
analyzed how the hukou registry system affected
environmental inequality in Jiangsu province. Their
ﬁndings show that urban workers with rural hukou
may be disproportionately exposed to environmental
pollution even if they do not practically work in
contaminated industries, because contamination treat-
ment facilities tend to be constructed in the areas
where rural migrants live.
Other reasons
In addition to the aforementioned key factors affecting
environmental inequality, many researchers have
studied the effects of environmental inequality from
other perspectives. For example, Jerrett et al. ( 2001)
analyzed residents’ air pollution exposure in Hamilton
from 1985 to 1994 using the OLS and the spatial
autoregressive method. The results demonstrate that
the unemployment rate is positively correlated with
pollution exposure, meaning that unemployed people
often face more serious environmental pollution.
Bakhtsiyarava and Nawrotzki ( 2017) studied the
relationship between environmental inequality and
immigration at different immigrant wealth levels,
using the US immigration demographics and the
EPA’s toxic emissions inventory data from 2005 to
2011. The authors maintain that Mexican immigrants
tend to stay away from heavy pollution in low-income
communities, while they frequently face higher envi-
ronmental pollution exposure in high-income areas
due to housing discrimination and lower socioeco-
nomic status.
In summary, even though race and economic status
have been found to be the major factors leading to
environmental inequality, the extent of their inﬂuence
varies considerably in line with differences among
research subjects, the research methods employed, and
pollution indicators. In addition, there are other factors
that affect environmental inequality, such as human
capital, population density, household registration
system, unemployment rate, and immigration. It is
worth noting that many factors contributing to envi-
ronmental inequality cannot be separated from each
other. In reality, the correlations between these factors
are complex. For instance, African-Americans face
higher environmental risk than others, but African-
Americans often have low socioeconomic status
characteristics, including high unemployment rate,
low education level, and low income. Accurately
identifying the causes of environmental inequality is
not a simple task.
In order to test the contribution of a particular factor
to environmental inequality, many confounding vari-
ables thus need to be considered. Moreover, the
existing studies are mainly based on research on
developed countries, with correspondingly little
research carried out in developing countries. However,
this lack of concern does not demonstrate that the issue
of environmental inequality is not serious in develop-
ing countries. Therefore, for deepening environmental
inequality research, we recommend that future
research place a greater emphasis on this in developing
countries on the basis of the existing literatures. In
addition, when doing so, analyses of the causes of
environmental inequality should be conducted that are
more in line with the policy systems and realities of
developing countries, rather than applying bench-
marks from developed countries.
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3151

[[PAGE 20]]
Concluding remarks
The issue of environmental inequality has been
present for over three decades and is currently
receiving widespread academic attention. Yet, the
existing research still lacks a comprehensive review of
the literature on environmental inequality. The current
paper focuses on the deﬁnition, measurement, perfor-
mance, and causes of environmental inequality in
order to provide a panorama for future studies of
environmental inequality. By reviewing environmen-
tal inequality from various angles, on the basis of the
notion of environmental justice, this paper explicitly
deﬁnes the environmental inequality, which reveals
the differences among different groups exposed to
environmental pollution.
As for how to measure environmental inequality,
the paper highlights the three main methods used in
existing research: unit-based, distance-based, and
risk-/exposure-based. Numerous studies have pro-
vided empirical evidence concerning the performance
of environmental inequality according to the inﬂu-
ences of environmental pollution on the health status,
education level, labor productivity, and real estate
price among different groups. Raising the issue of
what are the factors that affect environmental inequal-
ity could be solved from seven aspects, such as ethnic
differences, economic status, human capital, popula-
tion density, household registration system, unem-
ployment rate, and immigration. Recognizing this, we
maintain that future studies can be undertaken with
reference to the following three aspects, based on the
existing research.
First, studies can be carried out on improving the
measures of environmental inequality that are cur-
rently based on developed countries. The approaches
we review, encompassing geographic units containing
environmental hazards, and simple geographic dis-
tances to complex models of atmospheric pollutant
concentration, are based on increasingly detailed
pollution indicators data, such as TSDFs, TRI, and
RCRA. However, these methods mainly focus on the
spatial scale, neglecting differences at the individual
level. Even within the same spatial unit, the distribu-
tion of environmental risk may differ among different
individuals or families. Therefore, it would be worth-
while to examine differences in the environmental risk
faced by individuals from a more micro-level
perspective.
Second, the performance mechanism of environ-
mental inequality needs to be further investigated. The
current research on the performance of environmental
inequality mainly concerns the unfavorable impacts of
environmental pollution on the health status, educa-
tion level, labor productivity, and real estate prices
among various groups, while the performance mech-
anism itself of environmental inequality has received
little attention. Therefore, future studies are required
to more clearly reveal the conditions and mechanisms
that lead to different performance of environmental
inequality; this would, in turn, help to engender a
deeper comprehension of environmental inequality in
different groups, and its causes.
Finally, compared to environmental inequality
research in developed countries, that in the context
of less-developed countries, is lacking. Subsequent
research in developing countries faces many limita-
tions, including theory and data, yet there is still a
broader research space. On the one hand, the current
theory of environmental inequality is mainly based on
empirical facts derived from research in developed
countries, with existing numerous discrepancy
between developed and less-developed countries
according to economic development level, institu-
tional infrastructure, and statistical system. Thus, the
problem of whether the theory and measures of
environmental inequality as they have been applied
to developed countries can be extended to developing
countries, merits further exploration.
On the other hand, a considerable number of less-
developed countries are undergoing the rapidly
expanding industrialization and urbanization, suffer-
ing from serious environmental pollution. Moreover,
there are many deﬁciencies in developing countries,
such as institutional infrastructure and social security,
which are facing serious social inequality. Thus, in
these cases environmental pollution is combined with
social inequality, resulting in frequent and complex
manifestations of environmental inequality, as well as
serious consequences. There is, therefore, a need to
systematically examine the causes and consequences
of environmental inequality in less-developed coun-
tries, which would further enrich and expand the body
of environmental inequality research.
Acknowledgments We acknowledge the ﬁnancial support
from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos.
71773075, 71922015, and 72004204), the National Social
123
3152 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 21]]
Science Foundation of China (No. 18ZDA102), Shanghai Soft
Science Research Program (No. 20692103100), and the
Humanities Social Sciences Pre-Research Fund of Zhejiang
University of Technology.
Authors’ contributions SS done conceptualization,
supervision, formal analysis, and writing—original draft; LL
performed formal analysis, visualization, and writing—original
draft; ZT was involved in conceptualization, supervision, formal
analysis, and writing—review and editing.
Funding The National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Nos. 71773075, 71922015, and 72004204), the National Social
Science Foundation of China (No. 18ZDA102), Shanghai Soft
Science Research Program (No. 20692103100), and the
Humanities Social Sciences Pre-Research Fund of Zhejiang
University of Technology.
Declaration
Conﬂict of interest The author declared that there is no
conﬂict of interest.
Consent for publication All the authors consent to participate
and consent to publish before reference in the manuscript.
References
Agarwal, N., Banternghansa, C., & Bui, L. T. M. (2010). Toxic
exposure in America: Estimating fetal and infant health
outcomes from 14 years of TRI reporting. Journal of
Health Economics, 29 (4), 557–574.
Ai, H., Hu, S., Li, K., & Shao, S. (2020). Environmental regu-
lation, total factor productivity, and enterprise duration:
Evidence from China. Business Strategy and the Envi-
ronment, 26(9), 2284–2296.
Anderton, D. L., Anderson, A. B., Oakes, J. M., & Fraser, M. R.
(1994). Environmental equity: The demographics of
dumping. Demography, 31, 229–248.
Anderton, D. L., Oakes, J. M., & Egan, K. L. (1997). Environ-
mental equity in superfund: Demographics of the discovery
and prioritization of abandoned toxic sites. Evaluation
Review, 21(1), 3–26.
Ash, M., & Fetter, T. R. (2004). Who lives on the wrong side of
the environmental tracks? Social Science Quarterly, 85(2),
441–462.
Azimi, M., Feng, F., & Zhou, C. (2019). Air pollution inequality
and health inequality in China: An empirical study. Envi-
ronmental Science and Pollution Research, 26 ,
11962–11974.
Bakhtsiyarava, M., & Nawrotzki, R. J. (2017). Environmental
inequality and pollution advantage among immigrants in
the United States. Applied Geography, 81 , 60–69.
Banzhaf, S., Ma, L., & Timmins, C. (2019). Environmental
justice: The economics of race, place, and pollution.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33 (1), 185–208.
Barrera, F., Reyespaecke, S., & Banzhaf, E. (2016). Indicators
for green spaces in contrasting urban settings. Ecological
Indicators, 62, 212–219.
Been, V. (1995). Analyzing evidence of environmental justice.
Journal of Land Use & Environmental Law, 11 (1), 1–36.
Been, V., & Gupta, F. (1997). Coming to the nuisance or going
to the barrios: A longitudinal analysis of environmental
justice claims. Ecology Law Quarterly, 24 (1), 1–56.
Bell, M. L., & Ebisu, K. (2012). Environmental inequality in
exposures to airborne particulate matter components in the
united states. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120(12),
1699–1704.
Berman, J. D., McCormack, M. C., Koehler, K. A., Connolly, F.,
Clemons-Erby, D., Davis, M. F., Gummerson, C., Leaf, P.
J., Jones, T. D., & Curriero, F. C. (2018). School envi-
ronmental conditions and links to academic performance
and absenteeism in urban, mid-Atlantic public schools.
International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental
Health, 221(5), 800–808.
Boer, J. T., Pastor, M., Sadd, J. L., & Snyder, L. D. (1997). Is
there environmental racism: The demographics of haz-
ardous waste in Los Angeles. Social Science Quarterly,
78(4), 793–810.
Bornstein, R. F. (1989). Exposure and affect: Overview and
meta-analysis of research, 1968–1987. Psychological
Bulletin, 106(2), 265–289.
Boyce, J. K., Zwickl, K., & Ash, M. (2016). Measuring envi-
ronmental inequality. Ecological Economics, 124 ,
114–123.
Brulle, R. J., & Pellow, D. N. (2006). Environmental justice:
Human health and environmental inequalities. Annual
Review of Public Health, 27 (1), 103–124.
Bullard, R. D. (1990). Dumping in Dixie: Race, class, and
environmental quality. . Westview Press.
Burke, L. M. (1993). Race and environmental equity: A geo-
graphic analysis in Los Angeles. Geo Info Systems, 3 (9),
44–50.
Buzzelli, M., & Jerrett, M. (2004). Racial gradients of ambient
air pollution exposure in Hamilton, Canada. Environment
and Planning A, 36 , 1855–1876.
Chakraborty, J. (2006). Evaluating the environmental justice
impacts of transportation improvement projects in the US.
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environ-
ment, 11(5), 315–323.
Chakraborty, J., & Armstrong, M. P. (1997). Exploring the use
of buffer analysis for the identiﬁcation of impacted areas in
environmental equity assessment. Cartography and Geo-
graphic Information Systems, 24 (3), 145–157.
Chakraborty, J., & Green, D. (2014). Australia’s ﬁrst national
level quantitative environmental justice assessment of
industrial air pollution. Environmental Research Letters,
9(4), 044010.
Chan, K. W., & Zhang, L. (1999). The hukou system and rural–
urban migration in China: Processes and changes. The
China Quarterly, 160 , 818–855.
Chang, T., Zivin, J. G., Gross, T., & Neidell, M. (2016). Par-
ticulate pollution and the productivity of pear packers.
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8 (3),
141–169.
Chang, T., Zivin, J. G., Gross, T., & Neidell, M. (2019). The
effect of pollution on worker productivity: Evidence from
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3153

[[PAGE 22]]
call center workers in China. American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics, 11 (1), 151–172.
Chay, K.Y., & Greenstone, M. (2003). Air quality, infant mor-
tality, and the Clean Air Act of 1970. NBER Working
Paper No 10053.
Chay, K. Y., & Greenstone, M. (2005). Does air quality matter?
Evidence from the housing market. Journal of Political
Economy, 113(2), 376–424.
Chen, S., Guo, C., & Huang, X. (2018). Air pollution, student
health, and school absences: evidence from China. Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management, 92 ,
465–497.
Chen, S., Oliva, P., & Zhang, P. (2018b). Air pollution and
mental health: Evidence from China. NBER Working
Paper No 24686.
Chen, Y., Ebenstein, A., Greenstone, M., & Li, H. (2013).
Evidence on the impact of sustained exposure to air pol-
lution on life expectancy from China’s Huai River policy.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(32),
12936–12941.
Chen, Y., Senthilkuma, N., Shen, H., & Shen, G. (2021).
Environmental inequality deepened during the COVID-19
in the developing world. Environmental Science & Tech-
nology, 55, 7–8.
Collins, T. W., & Grineski, S. E. (2019). Environmental injus-
tice and religion: Outdoor air pollution disparities in
metropolitan Salt Lake City, Utah. Annals of the American
Association of Geographers, 109 (5), 1597–1617.
Currie, J., Davis, L., Greenstone, M., & Walker, R. (2015).
Environmental health risks and housing values: Evidence
from 1600 toxic plant openings and closings. American
Economic Review, 105 (2), 678–709.
Currie, J., Hanushek, E. A., Kahn, E. M., Neidell, M., & Rivkin,
S. G. (2009). Does pollution increase school absences?
Review of Economics and Statistics, 91 (4), 682–694.
Currie, J., & Neidell, M. (2005). Air pollution and infant health:
What can we learn from California’s recent experience?
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120 (3), 1003–1030.
Currie, J., Neidell, M., & Schmieder, J. F. (2009). Air pollution
and infant health: Lessons from New Jersey. Journal of
Health Economics, 28 (3), 688–703.
Daniels, G., & Friedman, S. (1999). Spatial inequality and the
distribution of industrial toxic releases: Evidence from the
1990 TRI. Social Science Quarterly, 80 (2), 244–262.
Davidson, P., & Anderton, D. L. (2000). Demographics of
dumping II: A national environmental equity survey and
the distribution of hazardous materials handlers. Demog-
raphy, 37(4), 461–466.
Davies, T., & Mah, A. (2020). Toxic truths environmental jus-
tice and citizen science in a post-truth age . . Manchester
University Press.
Davis, L. W. (2011). The effect of power plants on local housing
values and rents. Review of Economics and Statistics,
93(4), 1391–1402.
Dobson, A. (1998). Justice and the environment: Conceptions of
environmental sustainability and theories of distributive
justice. . Oxford University Press.
Downey, L., Dubois, S., Hawkins, B., & Walker, M. (2008).
Environmental inequality in metropolitan America. Or-
ganization & Environment, 21 (3), 270–295.
Escobedo, F. J., Nowak, D. J., Wagner, J. E., La Maza, C. L.,
Rodriguez, M., Crane, D. E., & Hernandez, J. (2006). The
socioeconomics and management of Santiago de Chile’s
public urban forests. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening,
4(3–4), 105–114.
Ferna´ndez, I. C., & Wu, J. (2016). Assessing environmental
inequalities in the city of Santiago (Chile) with a hierar-
chical multiscale approach. Applied Geography, 74 ,
160–169.
Forastiere, F., Stafoggia, M., Tasco, C., Picciotto, S., Agabiti,
N., Cesaroni, G., & Perucci, C. A. (2007). Socioeconomic
status, particulate air pollution, and daily mortality: Dif-
ferential exposure or differential susceptibility. American
Journal of Industrial Medicine, 50 (3), 208–216.
Glickman, T. S., Golding, D., & Hersh, R. (1995). GIS-based
environmental equity analysis: A case study of TRI facili-
ties in the Pittsburgh area . . Kluwer Academic.
Greenberg, M. (1993). Proving environmental inequity in siting
locally unwanted land uses. Risk: Issues in Health &
Safety, 4(3), 235–252.
Grove, M., Ogden, L., Pickett, S., Boone, C., Buckley, G.,
Locke, D. H., Lord, C., & Hall, B. (2018). The legacy
effect: Understanding how segregation and environmental
injustice unfold over time in Baltimore. Annals of the
American Association of Geographers, 108 (2), 524–537.
Hamilton, J. T. (1995). Testing for environmental racism:
Prejudice, proﬁts, political power? Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, 14 (1), 107–132.
Hanna, R., & Oliva, P. (2015). The effect of pollution on labor
supply: Evidence from a natural experiment in Mexico
City. Journal of Public Economics, 122 , 68–79.
Hartley, T. W. (1995). Environmental justice: An environmental
civil rights value acceptable to all world views. Environ-
mental Ethics, 17 (3), 277–289.
Havard, S., Deguen, S., Zmirou-Navier, D., Schillinger, C., &
Bard, D. (2009). Trafﬁc-related air pollution and socioe-
conomic status: A spatial autocorrelation study to assess
environmental equity on a small-area scale. Epidemiology,
20(2), 223–230.
He, J., Liu, H., & Salvo, A. (2019). Severe air pollution and
labor productivity: Evidence from industrial towns in
China. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
11(1), 173–201.
Hird, J. A., & Reese, M. (1998). The distribution of environ-
mental quality: An empirical analysis. Social Science
Quarterly, 79(4), 693–716.
Holiﬁeld, R., Chakraborty, J., & Walker, G. (2017). The rout-
ledge handbook of environmental justice . . Routledge.
Ihlanfeldt, K. R., & Taylor, L. O. (2004). Externality effects of
small-scale hazardous waste sites: Evidence from urban
commercial property markets. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 47 (1), 117–139.
Ikeme, J. (2003). Equity, environmental justice and sustain-
ability: Incomplete approaches in climate change politics.
Global Environmental Change, 13 (3), 195–206.
Jerrett, M. (2009). Global geographies of injustice in trafﬁc-
related air pollution exposure. Epidemiology, 20 (2),
231–233.
Jerrett, M., Burnett, R. T., Kanaroglou, P. S., Eyles, J., Finkel-
stein, N., Giovis, C., & Brook, J. R. (2001). A GIS-envi-
ronmental justice analysis of particulate air pollution in
123
3154 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156

[[PAGE 23]]
Hamilton Canada. Environment and Planning A, 33 (6),
955–973.
Kiel, K. A. (1995). Measuring the impact of the discovery and
cleaning of identiﬁed hazardous waste sites on house val-
ues. Land Economics, 71 (4), 428–435.
Knibbs, L. D., & Barnett, A. G. (2015). Assessing environ-
mental inequalities in ambient air pollution across urban
Australia. Spat Spatiotemporal Epidemiol, 13 , 1–6.
Kohlhase, J. E. (1991). The impact of toxic waste sites on
housing values. Journal of Urban Economics, 30 (1), 1–26.
Krellenberg, K., Mu¨ller, A., Schwarz, A., Ho¨fer, R., & Welz, J.
(2013). Flood and heat hazards in the Metropolitan Region
of Santiago de Chile and the socio-economics of exposure.
Applied Geography, 38 , 86–95.
Kruize, H., Driessen, P. P., Glasbergen, P., & Van Egmond, K.
(2007). Environmental equity and the role of public policy:
Experiences in the Rijnmond region. Environmental
Management, 40(4), 578–595.
Lanier, C., Deram, A., Cuny, M. A., Cuny, D., & Occelli, F.
(2019). Spatial analysis of environmental inequalities
caused by multiple air pollutants: A cumulative impact
screening method, applied to the north of France. Ecolog-
ical Indicators, 99 , 91–100.
Laurent, E. (2011). Issues in environmental justice within the
European Union. Ecological Economics, 70 (11),
1846–1853.
Laurian, L., & Funderburg, R. (2014). Environmental justice in
France? A spatio-temporal analysis of incinerator location.
Journal of Environmental Planning and Management,
57(3), 424–446.
Lavy, V., Ebenstein, A., & Roth, S. (2014). The long run human
capital and economic consequences of high-stakes exami-
nations. NBER Working Paper No. 20647.
Le Boennec, R., & Salladarre ´, F. (2017). The impact of air
pollution and noise on the real estate market. The case of
the 2013 European Green Capital: Nantes France. Eco-
logical Economics, 138 , 82–89.
Li, G., Lu, S., Shao, S., Yang, L., & Zhang, K. (2021). Do
environmental regulations hamper small enterprises’ mar-
ket entry? Evidence from China. Business Strategy and the
Environment, 30(1), 252–266.
Liu, Z. (2005). Institution and inequality: The hukou system in
China. Journal of Comparative Economics, 33 (1),
133–157.
Lucier, C., Rosofsky, A., London, B., Scharber, H., & Shandra,
J. M. (2011). Toxic pollution and school performance
scores: Environmental ascription in East Baton Rouge
Parish Louisiana. Organization & Environment, 24 (4),
423–443.
Ma, C. (2010). Who bears the environmental burden in China:
An analysis of the distribution of industrial pollution
sources? Ecological Economics, 69 (9), 1869–1876.
Ma, J., Liu, B., Mitchell, G., & Dong, G. (2018). A spatial
analysis of air pollution and environmental inequality in
Beijing, 2000–2010. Journal of Environmental Planning &
Management, 62(14), 2437–2458.
Maantay, J. A. (2007). Asthma and air pollution in the Bronx:
Methodological and data considerations in using GIS for
environmental justice and health research. Health & Place,
13(1), 32–56.
Marshall, J. D. (2008). Environmental inequality: Air pollution
exposures in California’s South Coast Air Basin. Atmo-
spheric Environment, 42 (21), 5499–5503.
Michaels, R. G., & Smith, V. K. (1990). Market segmentation
and valuing amenities with hedonic models: The case of
hazardous waste sites. Journal of Urban Economics, 28(2),
223–242.
Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) (1998) Ofﬁcial
Reply of the State Council Concerning Acid Rain Control
Zone and Sulfur Dioxide Pollution Control Zone.
Mitchell, G., & Dorling, D. (2003). An environmental justice
analysis of British air quality. Environment and Planning
A, 35(5), 909–929.
Mizen, A., Lyons, J., Milojevic, A., Doherty, R., Wilkinson, P.,
Carruthers, D., Akbari, A., Lake, I., Davies, G., Sallakh,
M., Fry, R., Dearden, L., & Rodgers, S. E. (2020). Impact
of air pollution on educational attainment for respiratory
health treated students: A cross sectional data linkage
study. Health & Place, 63 , 102355.
Mohai, P., Kweon, B., Lee, S., & Ard, K. (2011). Air pollution
around schools is linked to poorer student health and aca-
demic performance. Health Affairs, 30 (5), 852–862.
Mohai, P., Lantz, P. M., Morenoff, J. D., House, J. S., & Mero,
R. P. (2009). Racial and socioeconomic disparities in res-
idential proximity to polluting industrial facilities: Evi-
dence from the Americans’ changing lives study. American
Journal of Public Health, 99 , 1–23.
Mohai, P., & Saha, R. (2006). Reassessing racial and socioe-
conomic disparities in environmental justice research.
Demography, 43(2), 383–399.
Mohai, P., & Saha, R. (2007). Racial inequity in the distribution
of hazardous waste: A national-level reassessment. Social
Problems, 54(3), 343–370.
Morello-Frosch, R., Zuk, M., Jerrett, M., Shamasunder, B., &
Kyle, A. D. (2011). Understanding the cumulative impacts
of inequalities in environmental health: Implications for
policy. Health Affairs, 30 (5), 879–887.
Namdeo, A., & Stringer, C. (2008). Investigating the relation-
ship between air pollution, health and social deprivation in
Leeds UK. Environment International, 34 (5), 585–591.
Noonan, D. S., Turaga, R. M., & Baden, B. M. (2009). Super-
fund, hedonics, and the scales of environmental justice.
Environmental Management, 44 (5), 909–920.
Oakes, J. M., Anderton, D. L., & Anderson, A. B. (1996). A
longitudinal analysis of environmental equity in commu-
nities with hazardous waste facilities. Social Science
Research, 25(2), 125–148.
OECD. (2016). The economic consequences of outdoor air
pollution. . OECD Publishing.
Ouyang, W., Gao, B., Cheng, H., Hao, Z., & Wu, N. (2018).
Exposure inequality assessment for PM
2.5 and the potential
association with environmental health in Beijing. Science
of the Total Environment, 635 , 769–778.
Padilla, C. M., Kihal-Talantikite, W., Vieira, V. M., Rossello,
P., Le Nir, G., Zmirou-Navier, D., & Deguen, S. (2014).
Air quality and social deprivation in four French
metropolitan areas: A localized spatio-temporal environ-
mental inequality analysis. Environmental Research, 134 ,
315–324.
Pastor, M., Sadd, J., & Morello-Frosch, R. (2002). Who’s
minding the kids? Pollution, public schools, and
123
Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156 3155

[[PAGE 24]]
environmental justice in Los Angeles. Social Science
Quarterly, 83(1), 263–280.
Pastor, M., Sadd, J., & Morello-Frosch, R. (2004). Reading,
writing and toxics: Children’s health, academic perfor-
mance, and environmental justice in Los Angeles. Envi-
ronment and Planning C: Politics and Space, 22 (2),
271–290.
Pellow, D. N. (2000). Environmental inequality formation:
Toward a theory of environmental injustice. American
Behavioral Scientist, 43 (4), 581–601.
Perlin, S. A., Setzer, R. W., Creason, J., & Sexton, K. (1995).
Distribution of industrial air emissions by income and race
in the United States: An approach using the toxic release
inventory. Environmental Science & Technology, 29 (1),
69–80.
Pollock, P. H., & Vittas, M. E. (1995). Who bears the burdens of
environmental pollution: Race, ethnicity, and environ-
mental equity in Florida. Social Science Quarterly, 76 (2),
294–310.
Rinquist, E. J. (1997). Equity and the distribution of environ-
mental risk: The case of TRI facilities. Social Science
Quarterly, 78, 811–829.
Romero, H., Va´squez, A., Fuentes, C., Salgado, M., Schmidt,
A., & Banzhaf, E. (2012). Assessing urban environmental
segregation (UES): The case of Santiago de Chile. Eco-
logical Indicators, 23 , 76–87.
Ru¨ttenauer, T. (2018). Neighbours matter: A nation-wide small-
area assessment of environmental inequality in Germany.
Social Science Research, 70 , 198–211.
Samoli, E., Stergiopoulou, A., Santana, P., Rodopoulou, S.,
Mitsakou, C., Dimitroulopoulou, C., Bauwelinck, M., de
Hoogh, K., Costa, C., Marı ´-Dell’Olmo, M., Corman, D.,
Vardoulakis, S., & Katsouyanni, K. (2019). Spatial vari-
ability in air pollution exposure in relation to socioeco-
nomic indicators in nine European metropolitan areas: A
study on environmental inequality. Environmental Pollu-
tion, 249, 345–353.
Schaeffer, Y., & Tivadar, M. (2019). Measuring environmental
inequalities: Insights from the residential segregation lit-
erature. Ecological Economics, 164 , 106329.
Schoolman, E. D., & Ma, C. (2012). Migration, class and
environmental inequality: Exposure to pollution in China’s
Jiangsu Province. Ecological Economics, 75 , 140–151.
Schu¨le, S. A., Gabriel, K. M., & Bolte, G. (2017). Relationship
between neighbourhood socioeconomic position and
neighbourhood public green space availability: An envi-
ronmental inequality analysis in a large German city
applying generalized linear models. International Journal
of Hygiene and Environmental Health, 220 (4), 711–718.
Shao, S., Hu, Z., Cao, J., Guan, D., & Yang, L. (2020). Envi-
ronmental regulation and enterprise innovation: A review.
Business Strategy and the Environment, 29(3), 1465–1478.
Sheppard, E. R., Leitner, H., Mcmaster, R. B., & Tian, H. O.
(1999). GIS-based measures of environmental equity:
Exploring their sensitivity and signiﬁcance. Journal of
Exposure Analysis & Environmental Epidemiology, 9 (1),
18–28.
Smiley, K. T. (2019). A polluting creed: Religion and envi-
ronmental inequality in the United States. Sociological
Perspectives, 62(6), 980–1000.
Szasz, A., & Meuser, M. (1997). Environmental inequalities:
Literature review and proposals for new directions in
research and theory. Current Sociology, 45 (3), 99–120.
Tanaka, S. (2015). Environmental regulations on air pollution in
China and their impact on infant mortality. Journal of
Health Economics, 42 , 90–103.
Tian, Z., Tian, Y., Chen, Y., & Shao, S. (2020). The economic
consequences of environmental regulation in China: From
a perspective of the environmental protection admonishing
talk policy. Business Strategy and the Environment, 29 (4),
1723–1733.
Tonne, C., Mila, C., Fecht, D., Alvarez, M., Gulliver, J., Smith,
J., Beevers, S., Anderson, H. R., & Kelly, F. (2018).
Socioeconomic and ethnic inequalities in exposure to air
and noise pollution in London. Environment International,
115, 170–179.
Verbeek, T. (2019). Unequal residential exposure to air pollu-
tion and noise: A geospatial environmental justice analysis
for Ghent Belgium. SSM-Population Health, 7 , 100340.
Walker, G. (2012). Environmental justice: Concepts, evidence
and politics. . Routledge.
World Bank (2016). The cost of air pollution: Strengthening the
economic case for action. Washington, DC.
World Health Organization (2018). 9 Out of 10 people world-
wide breathe polluted air, but more countries are taking
action. Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/
02-05-2018-9-out-of-10-people-worldwide-breathe-
polluted-air-but-more-countries-are-taking-action.
World Health Organization (2019). Environmental health
inequalities in Europe: Second assessment report.
Wu, X., & Treiman, D. J. (2004). The household registration
system and social stratiﬁcation in China: 1955–1996. De-
mography, 41(2), 363–384.
Zhang, W., Liu, Y., Feng, K., Hubacek, K., Wang, J., Liu, M.,
Jiang, L., Jiang, H., Liu, N., Zhang, P., Zhou, Y., & Bi, J.
(2018). Revealing environmental inequality hidden in
China’s inter-regional trade. Environmental Science &
Technology, 52(13), 7171–7181.
Zhao, X., Zhang, S., & Fan, C. (2014). Environmental exter-
nality and inequality in China: Current status and future
choices. Environmental Pollution, 190 , 176–179.
Zhao, Z., Zhang, Z., Wang, Z., Ferm, M., Liang, Y., & Norba¨ck,
D. (2008). Asthmatic symptoms among pupils in relation to
winter indoor and outdoor air pollution in schools in
Taiyuan China. Environmental Health Perspectives,
116(1), 90–97.
Zivin, G. J., & Neidell, M. (2012). The impact of pollution on
worker productivity. American Economic Review, 102 (7),
3652–3673.
Zwickl, K., Ash, M., & Boyce, J. K. (2014). Regional variation
in environmental inequality: Industrial air toxics exposure
in U.S. cities. Ecological Economics, 107 , 494–509.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
123
3156 Environ Geochem Health (2022) 44:3133–3156