[[PAGE 1]]
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Landscape and Urban Planning
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/landurbplan
Environmental justice and ﬂood prevention: The moral cost of ﬂoodwater
redistribution
Kuei-Hsien Liao a,⁎
,J e ﬀrey Kok Hui Chan b, Yin-Ling Huang c
a Graduate Institute of Urban Planning, National Taipei University, Taiwan
b Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
c Department of Social Work, Soochow University, Taiwan
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Environmental justice
Flood adaptation
Flood control infrastructure
Flood prevention
Floodwater redistribution
Taipei
ABSTRACT
Flood prevention is a predominant practice in ﬂood hazard mitigation. Governments around the world have been
striving to protect important urban centers from ﬂooding at all cost. Often carried out through ﬂood control
infrastructure and commonly perceived as a technical exercise, ﬂood prevention can however lead to environ-
mental injustice. This is because ﬂood prevention measures do not eliminate but only redistribute ﬂoodwater;
they often impose new ﬂood risks on people elsewhere or precipitate ﬂooding in another place that would bring
about the displacement of an entire community. As governments around the world have come to prioritize
economic and political centers for ﬂood protection, the costs of ﬂood prevention are often disproportionately
borne by communities that are already vulnerable, disadvantaged, and marginalized —resulting in gross in-
justice. However, the environmental injustice precipitated by ﬂood prevention through the inequitable process
of ﬂoodwater redistribution has yet to be systematically examined. We illustrate the problem through the case of
the Taipei Area Flood Control Plan, which have unjustly harmed two marginalized communities of Zhouho and
Shezidao. Because ﬂood prevention measures are likely to be more intensively implemented in the face of in-
creasingly extreme storms against the backdrop of accelerating urbanization, the moral cost of ﬂood prevention
requires greater attention. To address this environmental injustice, we argue for a paradigm shift towards ﬂood
adaptation in ﬂood hazard mitigation.
1. Introduction
Flood prevention —deﬁned here as the prevention of riverine
ﬂooding—has long been a universal ideology. It has been taken for
granted that ﬂoods must not occur in urban centers or urban develop-
ment will be severely impeded. Flood prevention is largely achieved
through ﬂood control infrastructure (FCI) that uses structural measures,
such as channelization, levees, dams, and ﬂood diversion, to modify the
geomorphology and hydrology of the river. Often portrayed as a tech-
nical exercise, FCI is nevertheless politically charged and morally sig-
niﬁcant because it can confer ﬂood safety for some at the cost of others.
For example, FCI can worsen ﬂood risk for others, and while this ﬂood
risk is unintended, it is a foreseeable imposition (see Pinter, Hutho ﬀ,
Dierauer, Remo, & Damptz, 2016 ). However, relatively little has been
discussed on how ﬂood prevention measures, as interventions to pro-
vide safety for certain groups, could end up compromising the well-
being of others. We argue that ﬂood prevention could lead to a parti-
cular form of environmental injustice through the process of unjust
ﬂoodwater redistribution .
Unjust ﬂoodwater redistribution can be framed in at least the fol-
lowing two ways. Typically, such a redistribution occurs when a ﬂood
prevention measure alters the ﬂow locally to increase the ﬂood stage
elsewhere ( Hartmann, 2011 ). Philosophically, this redistribution re-
sembles a class of ‘upstream/downstream’ ethical problems ( Scherer,
1990), where one party makes a unilateral decision that is non-re-
ciprocal and that entails negative impacts on another party, and this
impacted party is unable to a ﬀect or protest this mistreatment. In either
or both framings, the outcomes are unjust because the impacted party
often does not bene ﬁt from the ﬂood prevention measure (see Doorn,
2015).
Furthermore, unjust ﬂoodwater redistribution is compounded by
the fact that ﬂooding does not occur uniformly across geographical
space. Flood risk is inherently unfair ( Johnson, Penning-Rowsell, &
Parker, 2007 ), and such inequity is already built into how urban
landscapes are shaped amid certain geographies ( Colten, 2007). In this
article, we argue that unjust ﬂoodwater redistribution by ﬂood
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2019.04.012
Received 2 September 2018; Received in revised form 10 March 2019; Accepted 12 April 2019
⁎ Corresponding author at: Graduate Institute of Urban Planning, National Taipei University, New Taipei City 237, Taiwan.
E-mail addresses: liaokh@mail.ntpu.edu.tw (K.-H. Liao), jeﬀrey_chan@sutd.edu.sg (J.K.H. Chan).
Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
Available online 23 April 2019
0169-2046/ © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
T

[[PAGE 2]]
prevention—even when it is a concerted e ﬀort to safeguard certain
social groups in one location —can further exacerbate both the ﬂood
and displacement risks of the already vulnerable social groups in other
locations. In other words, ﬂood prevention measures confer safety for
certain groups at a moral cost of disadvantaging others. Our arguments
complicate an otherwise clear visual of securing ﬂood safety and well-
being through ﬂood prevention. The complex moralities of ﬂood pre-
vention beg the question of what kind of moral framework of justice is
able to address the ‘wicked’ implications of ﬂood prevention (see Rittel
& Webber, 1973).
Precedent cases suggest that communities imposed with heighted
ﬂood risks or displacement by ﬂood prevention planning usually had
neither participated in the decision-making process, nor given their
voluntary consent to accept these risks. These communities were often
neither identi ﬁed beforehand nor duly recognized as legitimate stake-
holders and rightful claimants (see Penz, Drydyk, & Bose, 2011); their
rights to safety and well-being were often unjustly denied. For example,
during the 2011 catastrophic ﬂood of Central Thailand, the Thai Gov-
ernment built a ﬁfteen kilometers long ring of dikes and sandbags in
order to keep central Bangkok dry, which led to a buildup of water
outside the protected zone and trapped the residents there amid rising,
ﬁlthy, and stagnant ﬂoodwater for weeks ( Edmonds, 2014 ). In ﬂood
prevention planning, environmental injustice tends to emerge ﬁrst
through a lack of recognition for certain socioeconomically margin-
alized communities, which subsequently leads to their absence from
participation and a lack of their inputs. This likely results in ﬂoodwater
being redirected to these communities during extreme storm events,
which can lead to irreversible losses that compromise the critical
functions of these communities ( Penz et al., 2011 ). For this reason,
environmental justice in ﬂood prevention planning must consider re-
cognition, participation, and the capabilities approach (see Schlosberg,
2007).
In the remainder of this article our arguments are organized as
follows: Firstly, we articulate the notion of ﬂoodwater redistribution.
Secondly, we provide a framework of environmental justice con-
textualized in ﬂood prevention. Thirdly, we demonstrate the problem of
ﬂoodwater redistribution by using an actual case of the Taipei Area
Flood Control Plan in Taiwan, focusing on how two marginalized
communities—Zhouho and Shezidao —have been unjustly harmed in
order to prevent ﬂooding
in more economically valuable urban areas.
Fourthly, we discuss the challenges of environmental justice in ﬂood
prevention. In the conclusion, we draw out the contours for future re-
search on the ethical dimensions of ﬂood prevention and argue for a
paradigm shift in ﬂood hazard mitigation from ﬂood prevention to
ﬂood adaptation.
2. Flood prevention as ﬂoodwater redistribution
Flood prevention, which is often synonymous with ﬂood protection,
is a deliberate intervention to prevent riverine ﬂooding in order to
avoid life and property losses in an area that is naturally subjected to
riverine ﬂooding. In addition to FCI, there are other ﬂood prevention
measures that are deployed during an emergency event when the ex-
isting FCI appears incapable of defending against a ﬂood. These include
controlled ﬂooding, arti ﬁcial levee breach, and emergency ﬂood
ﬁghting using sandbags or mobile ﬂood barriers. Similar to FCI, these
ad hoc measures often aim to protect more important urban centers at
the expense of marginalized communities by unfairly redistributing
ﬂoodwater to them. Due to the limited scope of this article, our fol-
lowing arguments will only focus on FCI.
FCI is the dominant approach to ﬂood prevention; however, it is also
inherently limited: it cannot prevent all ﬂoods. Therefore, in reality, the
so-called ﬂood prevention measures only reduce ﬂood frequency by
preventing smaller ﬂoods. We argue that ﬂood prevention is a form of
ﬂoodwater redistribution. In this section, we discuss how FCI redis-
tributes ﬂoodwater during storm events, which then leads to
environmental injustice. The following four most common structural
measures of FCI will be discussed: (i) channelization; (ii) levees and
ﬂoodwalls; (iii) ﬂood control dams; and (iv) ﬂood diversion. Essentially,
all of them function by altering the spatial and temporal distributions of
river discharge during storm events.
Channelization refers to any combination of the following measures:
removing instream and riparian vegetation; modifying channel width,
depth, and gradient; armoring the river bank and/or bed; and straigh-
tening the river. Channelization increases the hydraulic e ﬃ ciency of
the channel such that the river drains faster, which prevents overbank
ﬂows ( Brookes, 1988). Because ﬂoodwater reaches downstream faster,
channelization can be seen as a ﬂood prevention measure that redis-
tributes ﬂoodwater from upstream to downstream.
Levees and ﬂoodwalls
 conﬁne high ﬂows within the channel to
prevent ﬂoodwater from spilling over the ﬂoodplain. These structures
redistribute ﬂoodwater from the ﬂoodplain to the channel, resulting in
higher ﬂow stages (i.e., ‘levee surcharges ’) in the channel and higher
ﬂood levels in the surrounding areas ( Pinter et al., 2016; Tobin, 1995).
For instance, through a modelling exercise, Pinter et al. (2016) show
that the Sny Island levee system could increase the ﬂow stage by 2.4 m
for a ﬂood of the same magnitude as the 1993 Mississippi Flood. The
‘additional’ discharge would then be redistributed downstream to areas
that are either unprotected or protected only by lower levees. Urban
rivers are often both channelized and leveed, resulting in the increase of
both ﬂood velocity and magnitude downstream of the protected area
(Green, 2010). However, when the ﬂow, which otherwise would be
spread over the ﬂoodplain, encounters a clogged channel or when high
tide impedes drainage, levees and ﬂoodwalls can also redistribute
ﬂoodwater in the opposite direction from downstream to upstream.
Food control dams detain river discharge upstream to prevent
downstream ﬂooding. It results in the inundation of an extensive area
upstream that otherwise would rarely be ﬂooded. Dams therefore re-
distribute ﬂoodwater from downstream to upstream. Ironically, a
multifunctional dam, the operation of which is highly complex, can
worsen downstream ﬂooding due to operational misjudgment ( Green,
2010).
Similar to dams, ﬂood diversion is also an upstream measure to
prevent downstream ﬂooding. It redirects a portion of the discharge of a
river through another channel during extreme storm events. The di-
version is via either an arti ﬁcial channel or an existing natural channel.
This diversion channel is also called a ﬂoodway or ﬂood bypass. During
extreme storm events, the ﬂoodwater upstream is redistributed to the
ﬂoodway and where the ﬂow is eventually discharged. The discharge
location is usually further downstream of the river or in another wa-
tershed.
In sum, FCI prevents ﬂooding of a certain area by shifting ﬂood-
water around the watershed or channeling ﬂoodwater across the wa-
tershed. In other words, FCI does not so much prevent ﬂooding during
storm events, but rather, it merely changes the space and time of
ﬂooding. While ﬂood engineers rarely describe FCI in this light, this
reality of FCI is long known. For example, Bower (2010) provides a
historic account of the endeavors of dyking (i.e., leveeing) along the
Assiniboine River in Manitoba, Canada. She reports that in the early
20th century, ﬂood engineers, governments, and local residents were
already well aware that “[w]hile dyking might prevent ﬂooding some
locations, it did so by in e ﬀect passing along the high water ” (p. 62).
Although this side-e ﬀect from ﬂoodwater redistribution by FCI is
known (see Bower, 2010; Douglas et al., 2009 ), it continues to be ne-
glected ( Lebel & Sinh, 2009). Society tends to focus on the success of
FCI in preventing most ﬂoods and the overall bene ﬁts of FCI, which are
often measured solely in economic terms ( Penning-Rowsell & Pardoe,
2012).
3. Deﬁ ning environmental justice in ﬂood prevention
Environmental justice has only been recently applied to examine
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
37

[[PAGE 3]]
ﬂood-related issues (see Lynn, 2017; Walker, 2012 ), and discussion on
the implications of justice in relevant literature remains scarce ( Thaler
& Hartmann, 2016 ). One of the key contributions of environmental
justice research has been to examine and evaluate the geography of risk
(Walker & Burningham, 2011 ). Until the catastrophe caused by Hurri-
cane Katrina in 2005, when it became obvious that existing social
vulnerabilities could amplify environmental harm, ﬂooding was not
perceived as a distinct form of environmental risk ( Walker &
Burningham, 2011 ).
Even though justice is a socially constructed framework with dif-
ferent actors attributing di ﬀerent meanings to this concept ( Kaufmann,
Priest, & Leroy, 2018 ), and no universally accepted deﬁ nition of en-
vironmental justice exists ( Walker & Burningham, 2011 ), environ-
mental justice in the context of ﬂooding nevertheless has been ex-
amined through the following two key approaches ( Kaufmann et al.,
2018). The ﬁrst is distributive justice, which comprises of either the
equitable distribution of ﬂood protection resources or ﬂood risks; the
second is procedural justice, which involves the constitution of fair
decision-making process behind these distributive decisions.
Existing literature re ﬂects this general distinction between dis-
tributive and procedural justice. Distributive justice has been explored
through the examination of the di ﬀerent allocation of resources, re-
sponsibilities, and costs for ﬂood prevention ( Begg, 2018; Colten,
Simms, Grismore, & Hemmerling, 2018); and through emphasizing the
uneven distribution of ﬂood risks across di ﬀerent social groups and
geographical spaces ( Collins, Grineski, & Chakraborty, 2018; Fielding,
2007; Johnson et al., 2007; O ’Hare & White, 2018; Walker &
Burningham, 2011). Procedural justice has been discussed in relation to
the constitution of governance and decision-making institutions in ﬂood
management ( Hartmann & Driessen, 2017; Kaufmann et al., 2018 ), for
example, by considering which community is included to participate in
ﬂood prevention planning and how collective decisions are made (see
Owen, 2012 ). Because procedural justice has to presume equal re-
presentation and voice, recent articulations on environmental justice
have also expanded to encompass critical components of recognition,
participation, and the capabilities approach ( Schlosberg, 2007 ).
Following this, we can further distinguish between the ex ante
frame of justice and the ex post frame of justice in the context of ﬂood
prevention (see Thaler, Zischg, Keiler, & Fuchs, 2018 ). The former ex-
amines whom or what to protect and how to allocate ﬂood protection
resources before a ﬂood; the latter ponders on the distribution of the
ﬂood
impacts, as well as the reparation and reconstruction after a ﬂood.
Because ﬂood-prone communities are unequally treated in ﬂood man-
agement, the ex ante frame aims to preempt injustice, while the ex post
frame aims to correct injustice. Each frame entails a di ﬀerent set of
issues, questions, and actions that are important for environmental
justice.
Even when di ﬀerent individuals or communities can agree on the
importance of distributive and procedural justice in both ex ante and ex
post frames, their respective deﬁ nitions of justice can still vary widely
(Davy, 1996). Ineluctably, there are many conceptions of justice (see
Sandel, 2010 ), but the utilitarian and the Rawlsian conceptions are
particularly salient because of their relevance in contemporary public
policy. It has been observed that distributive justice is often de ﬁned by
utilitarian justice , where communities that are deemed economically
more valuable ought to be protected at the expense —or even by the
sacriﬁce—of less economically valuable communities (see Roth &
Warner, 2009). However, others might deﬁ ne distributive justice
through a form of Rawlsian justice, where due priorities are given to the
least advantaged members in an unequal social arrangement. Through
Rawlsian justice, marginalized communities become the most likely
beneﬁciaries ( Thaler et al., 2018 )—not only would these communities
be free from being burdened with the redistributed ﬂoodwater, but also
they would enjoy special treatment because of their marginalized
status. The con ﬂict between utilitarian and Rawlsian justice have yet to
be conclusively settled in moral philosophy, or in ﬂood management.
Nevertheless, it is important to register that principled di ﬀerences exist
between these di ﬀerent conceptions of justice, and the fairest recourse
may be to subject these di ﬀerences to democratic scrutiny characterized
by publicity, equal representation, and voice.
Our argument that ﬂood prevention can lead to unjust outcomes
combines the angles of distributive and procedural justice with an
emphasis on the ex ante frame of justice. FCI can unfairly redistribute
ﬂoodwater to unwilling or under-prepared communities. Furthermore,
it can also complicate and worsen the collective prospect of fair deci-
sion-making in the watershed, leading to a situation where environ-
mental justice becomes even more elusive. For example, when a com-
munity in a particular watershed erects FCI to protect itself, this FCI
inevitably redistributes ﬂoodwater elsewhere. The redistributed ﬂood-
water often implies a greater ﬂood risk elsewhere ( Green, 2010; Tobin,
1995). This is why the so-called ﬂood
risk ‘reduction’ is often simply
ﬂood risk ‘redistribution’ (Lebel & Sinh, 2007 ), because the ‘reduced
risk’ is merely shifted from one place to another. To paraphrase Hardin
(2003), the bene ﬁts of ﬂood prevention enjoyed by this community are
derived at the cost of in ﬂicting probable harm on other communities
around it.
To compound this moral problem, other communities that are now
burdened with the unjust ﬂoodwater redistribution would subsequently
demand more protection for themselves, which leads to new FCI being
built or existing FCI being reinforced, thereby creating a vicious cycle
for even more FCI and higher levee surcharges for the watershed as a
whole ( Liao, 2014; Pinter et al., 2016; Tobin, 1995). In this way, FCI
not only leads to higher ﬂood risk, but also incites distrust between
communities that compete to construct ever higher levees. The side-
eﬀects of unjust ﬂoodwater redistribution of FCI corrode the prospects
for both distributive and procedural justice.
4. The case of the Taipei Area Flood Control Plan
We ﬂesh out the side-e ﬀects of unjust ﬂoodwater redistribution of
FCI through the case of the Taipei Area Flood Control Plan (TAFCP).
The Taipei Area is the most important political, economic, and cultural
center in Taiwan. Geographically, it includes the low-lying Taipei
Basin, with elevations under 20 m a.s.l. It is drained by the Danshui
River and its major tributaries, including the Keelung River, Xindian
River, and Dahan River ( Fig. 1). It covers the municipalities of Taipei
City and a portion of New Taipei City —the former is the capital of
Taiwan, while the latter is the most populated city in Taiwan. In this
section, we ﬁrst provide an overview of TAFCP and subsequently dis-
cuss its impacts on Zhouho and Shezidao.
This case study relies on archival government documents, grey lit-
erature, and ﬁeld visits. Unless noted otherwise, the description of
TAFCP is largely based on the “Evaluation Report on the Flood Control
Schemes for the Taipei Area ” (WRPC-MEA, 1970), a key document that
details the scope, rationale, and measures of TAFCP. Since Zhouho has
already disappeared for decades, the case has been assembled mainly
from grey literature, including a magazine article ( Li & Li, 1986 ) and
other unpublished manuscripts. On the other hand, the Shezidao case
has been assembled from a locally-published book in Taiwan ( Yang,
2016), together with various government reports, plans, and minutes
from more than 20 review committee meetings and town hall meetings
on the current development plan of Shezidao. Furthermore, ﬁeld visits
were conducted between August 2014 and August 2017 to verify the
details of this case and to document the present condition in Shezidao.
To
better understand the controversy surrounding the current devel-
opment of Shezidao, the lead author attended eight of the aforemen-
tioned review committee meetings between July 2017 and March 2019.
4.1. The Taipei Area Flood Control Plan (TAFCP)
In the 1910s, during the Japanese Colonization (from 1895 to
1945), concrete embankments and levees were ﬁrst introduced to
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
38

[[PAGE 4]]
control some sections of the Danshui River and its tributaries. In lieu of
the increasing population in the Taipei Area after World War II in the
1960s, the Taiwan Government started to enhance its ﬂood control
infrastructure. The “Danshui River Permanent Flood Control Plan ” was
carried out from 1964 to 1967. A few years later in 1970, the afore-
mentioned “Evaluation Report on the Flood Control Schemes for the
Taipei Area ” was published. It speci ﬁed the most feasible scheme to
protect the Taipei Area more extensively, and it gave rise to TAFCP,
which was carried out from 1981 to 1999. Hereafter, the scheme spe-
ciﬁed in this report will be referred to as ‘the 1970 scheme ’. It is ne-
cessary to distinguish between the early planning of TAFCP and its
physical outcome, because today, TAFCP is largely used to refer to the
entire physical FCI of the Taipei Area.
The overall objective of TAFCP is to protect the Taipei Area against
a 200-year ﬂood. Quintessentially, TAFCP relies on levees, in con-
junction with the Erchung Floodway that can divert more than one-
third of the ﬂood ﬂows from the Danshui River ( Fig. 2). TAFCP was
carried out in four construction phases, spanning across nearly four
decades. Besides the levees and the Erchung Floodway, other structural
measures included dredging, channel straightening, channel widening,
urban drainage systems, pumping stations, etc. After the o ﬃ cial com-
pletion of TAFCP in 1999, the government implemented another capital
plan to address the upstream sections of the Keelung River in New
Taipei City that was not included in the 1970 scheme. The objective is
Fig. 1. The Taipei Area. It refers to the low-lying Taipei Basin that is drained by the Danshui River and its major tributaries, including Keelung River, Xindian River,
and Dahan River. It covers the municipalities of Taipei City (dashed line) and a portion of New Taipei City (the rest in the map).
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
39

[[PAGE 5]]
to protect this relatively recent urbanized area along the Keelung River
against a 200-year ﬂood. The measures include levees and channeli-
zation, as well as the Yuanshanzi Floodway that was located further
upstream of the Keelung River and was completed in 2005.
Today, it is claimed that the Taipei Area is capable of resisting a
200-year ﬂood. The highest levee stands as tall as 9.4 m (Taipei City
Hydraulic Engineering O ﬃ ce, personal communication). In the past
decades, TAFCP has successfully prevented a number of riverine ﬂoods
that could have caused widespread disasters. However, not all com-
munities within the Taipei Area have bene ﬁted from TAFCP. When the
1970 scheme was being drafted, the Taipei Area was not as extensively
urbanized as it is today, and there were still many rural communities.
Zhouho and Shezidao are two such communities that were excluded
from the 1970 scheme and had to bear the brunt of TAFCP. In fact,
Zhouho no longer exists and was entirely erased by the Erchung
Floodway. Shezidao continues to be disadvantaged by being ‘outside
the levees ’ and threatened by the higher levees that protect other parts
of the Taipei Area.
4.2. Zhouho —erased by ﬂood diversion
Located in New Taipei City, the Erchung Floodway is the key
component of TAFCP ( Fig. 2). The curvilinear channel runs through the
ﬂoodplain of the left bank of the Danshui River, designed to divert up to
9200 cms out of 23,500 cms of ﬂood ﬂow at the con ﬂuence of the
Xindian and Dahan River. It is 7.7 km long with an average width of
450 m, covering a total area of 424 ha. Since its completion in 1984, the
Erchung Floodway has diverted ﬂows for ten times to successfully
prevent downstream ﬂooding. Today, the Erchung Floodway also
functions as a public park when it is not used for diversion.
Fig. 2. Overview of the Taipei Area Flood Control Plan (TAFCP). TAFCP relies on levees (shown as thick red lines), in conjunction with the Erchung Floodway to
protect most of the Taipei Area against a 200-year ﬂood. Excluded from TAFCP are Shezidao, Wugu, and Guandu, which were all rural areas in the 1970s. Today most
of Guandu is natural reserve and farmlands. While currently there are levees in Shezidao and Wugu to protect against a 20-year ﬂood, these levees are not parts of
TAFCP. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
40

[[PAGE 6]]
However, the Erchung Floodway used to be home to four villages of
∼2000 people. The village of Zhouho, comprised of ∼300 families and
∼1400 residents, was particularly heavily impacted because it was si-
tuated entirely within the Erchung Floodway ( Fig. 3). Before ﬂood di-
version emerged as a key solution to ﬂood prevention for the Taipei
Area, widening the channel at the left bank of the Danshui River near
the Taipei Bridge ( Fig. 3) was ﬁrst considered because it is the nar-
rowest downstream section of the river. This scheme was deemed in-
tractable because it would involve large-scale land resumption and
relocation of numerous residents in Sanchong, which was already
densely urbanized. Alternatively, ﬂood diversion through a rural area
would involve relocating a much smaller population. After a com-
parative study of di ﬀerent ﬂood diversion schemes, it was deemed that
creating a ﬂoodway through the Erchung area was ﬁnancially and hy-
draulically most feasible ( MEA, 1973 ), hence the Erchung Floodway.
Facing forced relocation, the a ﬀected villagers of Zhouho ﬁercely
protested against the decision to construct the Erchung Floodway,
citing reasons of questionable site selection, unclear demolition and
relocation plan, and inadequate compensation ( Wang & Lin, 2013). Led
by Zhouho villagers, the ﬁercest protest took place in 1983 when the
aﬀected villagers took to the street, blocked a major thoroughfare, and
brought tra ﬃ c to a standstill for nine hours ( Wang & Lin, 2013 ). It
should be noted that forced relocation in the name of infrastructural
and urban development was commonplace during the 1970s and 1980s,
when Taiwan underwent rapid economic development. However, the
people who faced relocation, in spite of their indignation, rarely pro-
tested openly because Taiwan then was still under martial law. Against
this backdrop, the open protests by the villagers a ﬀected by the
Erchung Floodway only indicated their extreme outrage.
Since 1979 when their homeland was o ﬃ cially designated as the
Erchung Floodway, the a ﬀected villagers su ﬀered from extreme anxiety
because they were neither informed on the exact date of demolition nor
the exact site for relocation; they only knew a few days before the
government demolished their homes, factories, and farms sometime in
1984 ( Li & Li, 1986). The monetary compensation was also too low for
the displaced villagers to a ﬀord to buy or even rent a home elsewhere in
the Taipei Area. Many did not even receive their compensation until
twenty years later. Those who were quali ﬁed to be rehoused ended up
waiting for two years before they could relocate to a permanent
dwelling after demolition. Most of the displaced villagers were farmers,
and the displacement resulted in the loss of farmland and their liveli-
hood. During this time, stories of depression and suicides were rampant
(Li & Li, 1986). Although no systematic research exists to document the
trauma borne by the a ﬀected villagers, the vast amount of literature on
the
negative impacts of forced relocation bears testimony to the tre-
mendous su ﬀering of these villagers (see e.g., Campos, Liao, & Yiu,
2018; Cernea, 2000 ).
While the Erchung Floodway was the direct cause of the hardship
for Zhouho villagers, their hardship was also in part the legacy of a
previous ﬂood control work. After a major ﬂood catastrophe in 1964,
the government dynamited the Shizito Hill near the mouth of the
Danshui River to widen the channel to facilitate drainage in the hope of
reducing ﬂooding ( Fig. 3). Unexpectedly, this resulted in the tides
moving unimpededly further inland, causing tidal ﬂooding and sea-
water intrusion in and around Zhouho; subsequently, Zhouho su ﬀered
from frequent ﬂooding and the degradation of their farmland ( Li & Li,
1986). In 1968, the a ﬀected area was then designated as a ‘ﬂoodplain
control zone ’, where further development was restricted. This desig-
nation ﬁrst resulted in low land values, which translated into ﬁnancial
tractability for the planners to acquire this land, and also explained why
Fig. 3. The historic location of Zhouho in relationship to the Erchung Floodway. There were three other villages located in the path of the Erchung Floodway.
Because Zhouho was entirely situated within the ﬂoodway, it was disproportionately impacted and subsequently entirely erased.
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
41

[[PAGE 7]]
this site was selected as a ﬂoodway in the ﬁrst place (see WRPC-MEA,
1970). Subsequently, this low land values also resulted in the low
compensation for villagers when they were displaced by the Erchung
Floodway.
In sum, the irreparable displacement of Zhouho was the con-
sequence of a channel widening work that led to its designation as a
ﬂoodplain control zone, which subsequently made it an ideal site for a
ﬂoodway. The uprooting of Zhouho has resulted in the compromised
capabilities of the residents because of livelihood losses and the se-
verance of communal ties.
4.3. Shezidao —burdened by levees elsewhere
Although Shezidao continues to exist, it has been successively dis-
advantaged by TAFCP’s systemic protection of other communities in the
Taipei Area. With a total area of 302 ha and a current population of
∼11,000, Shezidao is a peninsula located at the western border of
Taipei City ( Fig. 1). A sand bar formed at the con ﬂuence of the Danshui
River and Keelung River, Shezidao is low-lying, with an average ele-
vation of 2.5 m a.s.l. Before the 1970s, Shezidao supplied most of the
vegetables for the Taipei Area. It was not considered for protection in
the 1970 scheme because it was predominantly agricultural with a re-
latively low economic output. As such, it was marked as a ‘ﬂood zone ’
in the 1970 scheme, where land use should remain agricultural in order
to reduce ﬂood loss. Subsequently, Shezidao was also designated as a
‘development restricted zone ’, where any physical development was
prohibited, including the retro ﬁtting of any existing built structure.
Only temporary repair was allowed, and any permanent repair would
irrevocably classify the entire building as an illegal structure.
Over time, numerous buildings deteriorated and were rendered
unﬁt for safe human habitation. Moreover, as families grew over time,
more and more people were forced to cramp in the same old buildings.
This reality has led many residents, who are more economically abled,
to leave Shezidao. Today, the majority of those who are left behind are
either too old or ﬁnancially strapped. As a result, Shezidao ’s population
tends to comprise mostly of socio-economically disadvantaged groups
(Yang, 2016 ).
Under the development restriction, living in Shezidao would be
nearly impossible had this restriction been fully complied. Many re-
sidents had to build additional structures on top of or adjacent to ex-
isting structures and had to even constructi entirely new independent
structures to create more room for growing families. The government
has chosen to ignore these illegal structures. Over the past ﬁve decades
as the rest of the Taipei City developed and the quality of its built en-
vironment gradually improved, Shezidao has instead become increas-
ingly ‘backward’, as the media often reports. Along with Shezidao ’s
present deteriorating environment is a growing sense of abandonment
by the government. Because Shezidao residents are not protected by
TAFCP and do not enjoy the same standard of living as the rest of the
city, they often describe themselves as ‘second-class citizens ’ (Yang,
2016).
While Shezidao is not included in TAFCP, it has had some protection
against ﬂooding.
In 1973, embankments of 2.5 m high were built at
selected locations to prevent tidal ﬂooding. Later in 1978, these em-
bankments were raised to 4 m in response to the increased ﬂood risk
after the completion of the levees for Zhumei in the opposite bank of the
Keelung River (Fig. 2). In 1986, the ﬂood risk of Shezidao was increased
again with the completion of the levees for Sanchong and Luzhou in the
opposite bank of the Danshui River ( Fig. 2). Finally, in 1987 a 6 m high
levee system was built to protect the entire Shezidao; however, it is only
able to defend Shezidao against a 20-year ﬂood, while the rest of the
Taipei Area is protected against a 200-year ﬂood. Because of the un-
equal protection standards, Shezidao is imposed by a higher ﬂood risk;
therefore, a strong sentiment of injustice is prevalent among Shezidao
residents, who feel that they are being sacri ﬁced for the safety of the
rest of the Taipei Area ( Fig. 2). For this reason, local leaders have been
calling for the same protection standard as the rest of the Taipei Area.
Nevertheless, Shezidao continues to be disadvantaged by the path-
dependent demarcation of a ﬂood zone. Relocation has never been
proposed by the government as an option to address Shezidao ’s ﬂood
risk, but to address Shezidao ’s ‘backwardness’, nearly every mayor of
the Taipei City had, at one point or another, proposed a development
plan as a solution (see Taipei City Government, 2018 ). However, the
concern that Shezidao’ s development might compromise TAFCP had
prevented the realization of many of these plans ( Taipei City
Government, 2010). This is because carrying out urban development in
Shezidao would require Shezidao to be protected against a 200-year
ﬂood like the rest of the Taipei Area. This would mean an increase of
Shezidao’s existing levee system to 9.65 m in height, which would in
turn reduce the ﬂood carrying capacity in the watershed because She-
zidao has been serving as a ﬂood zone. Raising existing levees in She-
zidao could increase the ﬂood stages in the Danshui River, which might
overtop existing levees in the Taipei Area during an extreme storm
event. In June 2018, a new development plan for Shezidao, along with
its ﬂood control scheme that involves a 9.65 m high levee system, was
approved. The ﬂood control scheme is based on a hydraulic modeling
study, which suggests that in order not to compromise TAFCP, the
proposed levee system has to operate under several conditions. They
include levee setbacks in Shezidao, the removal of old waterfront
landﬁlls to maintain overall ﬂood carrying capacity in the watershed,
and levee reinforcement in Wugu ( Taipei City Government, 2010;
Fig. 4).
Within a ﬂood hazard mitigation paradigm that continues to be
ﬁxated
on ﬂood prevention as the only solution to ﬂood safety, it is
perceived that the conundrum of Shezidao can only be tackled by
building more FCI, which would further redistribute ﬂoodwater to
other places to implicate other communities. Moreover, and ironically,
while the proposed levee system may be what Shezidao residents have
longed for, it would however result in large-scale displacement because
it requires land resumption of the waterfront areas, home to most of
Shezidao’s population.
5. Discussion: challenges of environmental justice in ﬂood
prevention
The case of TAFCP shows how ﬂood prevention for the urban cen-
ters has marginalized two communities and reveals the prevalence of
utilitarian justice, where lost livelihoods and compromised interests of
the economic minority were deemed a lesser harm, relative to a greater
harm of the economic majority had ﬂooding impacted the latter. The
suﬀering of Zhouho and Shezidao re ﬂects a long-standing assumption
behind many development projects, where vaguely de ﬁned bene ﬁts
that accrue at larger scales tend to trump more concrete losses ex-
perienced at smaller or local scales ( Penz et al., 2011 ).
The dominance of utilitarian justice in ﬂood hazard mitigation
means that only the interests of higher income communities are salient
because they tend to represent the highest economic value. The equa-
tion of moral salience with high economic value may in turn suppress
other equally legitimate interests that are made less morally salient
because of their perceived low economic value. If decision makers in-
tend to rely on utilitarian justice as the basis of their ﬂood hazard mi-
tigation policies, they may be obliged to correct the biases of utilitarian
justice. Consider the case of Shezidao: while utilitarian justice is still
acknowledged by the decision makers —after all, the Taipei Area has to
be protected from a major storm event by designating Shezidao as a
ﬂood zone, the new development plan approved in 2018 also appears to
have enacted Rawlsian justice in recognizing the residents ’ right to
safety, which is especially acute for the already disadvantaged residents
of Shezidao. On the other hand, the case of Zhouho appears to suggest
that even if utilitarian justice may be a necessary framework to guide
decision-making on ﬂood hazard mitigation, it is never su ﬃ cient be-
cause the actual consequences can never be known in any exact way
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
42

[[PAGE 8]]
ahead of time ( Hansson, 2013). No decision maker can ever ﬁgure the
cost of compromised capabilities for two or three generations of the
original residents of Zhouho when they were evicted and lost their
friends and neighbors.
Furthermore, the case of Shezidao demonstrates that the co-ex-
istence of these two conceptions of justice can also create new un-
certainties for decision makers. These uncertainties are observed in the
following two ways. Firstly, by constructing FCI to protect Shezidao
with the same protection standards as the rest of the Taipei Area,
ﬂoodwater that otherwise would have been redistributed to Shezidao
during an extreme storm event would then be redistributed elsewhere,
and it may even endanger the rest of the Taipei Area by overtopping its
existing levees. Secondly, by acquiring the land required for FCI on
Shezidao, many residents would have to be relocated, which under-
mined their right as residents. This relocation, if it ever happens, is
likely to further precipitate anxiety and resistance among the residents.
The case of Shezidao then reveals how two major conceptions of justice
applied together in one location could con ﬂict, and this can lead to new
uncertainties that are created not so much by ﬂooding but rather, by
ﬂood hazard mitigation itself. And even if the decision makers had only
pursued either the utilitarian or Rawlsian justice, each notion of justice
is accompanied by its own moral cost. Utilitarian justice would have to
accept the unacceptable moral costs of denying certain communities
their right to safety and well-being, while Rawlsian justice would have
to wrestle with just how justi ﬁable it is to compromise the safety and
well-being of a far larger population for the sake of protecting a much
smaller group.
6. Conclusion: toward a ﬂood adaption paradigm
Because ﬂood prevention measures do not eliminate but only re-
distribute ﬂoodwater, protecting a naturally ﬂood-prone area from
ﬂooding would inevitably subject other areas to increased ﬂooding,
which would lead to either increased ﬂood risks or displacement. This is
an ethical issue of great moral signi ﬁcance because it often entails
preferential treatment and perhaps even deliberate acts of intentional
harm. If ﬂooding must be prevented, who should be ﬂooded in order to
protect whom? How is the ultimate decision justi ﬁable? There are no
easy answers to these questions. Utilitarian calculus may justify the
injustice of redistributing ﬂoodwater from one community to another,
but the equal right of the impacted community to safety and well-being
should not be neglected. For this reason, the question of ‘who to ﬂood at
whose expense ’ cannot be the right question for any ethical society,
where a moral imperative also has to exist to prevent the emergence of
this question. Particularly, in an era of climate change and continuing
urbanization, where ﬂoodwater redistributed from one community is
highly likely to end up impacting another community, the search for
ethical ﬂood hazard mitigation needs to look beyond the ideology, or
the paradigm, of ﬂood prevention.
While our arguments can neither refute the e ﬃ cacy of FCI to protect
certain locations, nor nullify the anticipation —or misconception, to be
more precise —that FCI provides ﬂood
 safety, they question the foun-
dational assumption of the ﬂood prevention paradigm, which is that a
river can be controlled by technologies. This assumption ignores the
escalating moral and social costs, as well as the negative side-eﬀ ects, of
ﬂood prevention measures; it also ignores the gross uncertainties as-
sociated with climate change. Together, the foundational assumption
behind the public endeavor of FCI, which promises visible political
eﬃ cacy and apparent psychological comfort, has to be carefully scru-
tinized now. A di ﬀerent paradigm for ﬂood hazard mitigation is ur-
gently needed.
What could possibly be a paradigm alternative to ﬂood prevention?
It should be noted ﬁrst that ﬂooding does not always lead to disasters.
Natural ﬂooding is key to the health of riverine ecosystems; and in some
parts of the world, ﬂooding is not only bene ﬁcial, but also necessary for
maintaining livelihoods. To try to prevent all forms of ﬂooding as
Fig. 4. Five conditions that need to be met in order for the proposed 9.65 m high levee system not to compromise TAFCP: (1) the levee in Shezidao along the Keelung
River needs to be set back for 80 –130 m; (2) the levee in Shezidao along the Danshui River needs to be set back for 30 m; (3) the decommissioned land ﬁll in Luzhou
along the Danshui River needs to be removed; (4) the decommissioned land ﬁll in Shanchong along the Danshui River needs to removed; (5) the levee along the Wugu
area needs to be heightened such that it can defend against a 200-year ﬂood ( Taipei City Government, 2010 ).
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
43

[[PAGE 9]]
though they are all hazardous is erroneous. Even when ﬂooding is ha-
zardous, FCI is hardly the only solution to ﬂood safety. Many forms of
vernacular settlements, even entire societies and civilizations, have
evolved to live harmoniously with periodic ﬂooding (Laituri, 2000). For
example, in many rural villages in the Mekong Delta, people have de-
veloped amphibious lifestyles and built forms to adapt to and bene ﬁt
from seasonal ﬂooding ( Liao, Tuan, & Nguyen, 2016 ). It demonstrates
that ﬂood exposure does not necessarily result in ﬂood loss and damage.
Although these adaptive exemplars are from settlement patterns dif-
ferent from the urban centers in the Global North, they are nonetheless
instructive counterpoises against the prevailing ﬂood prevention para-
digm today. Since ﬂood safety does not necessarily require ﬂood pre-
vention in the ﬁrst place, ﬂood prevention is hardly the only option for
ﬂood safety. Flood adaptation can be an alternative paradigm (see Liao,
2014; Liao et al., 2016).
Here, ﬂood adaptation means making the built en-
vironment—buildings, open spaces, infrastructure, etc. —“ﬁt for the
actual and expected ﬂood regime” (Liao et al., 2016, p. 70). Contrasting
with the ﬂood prevention paradigm, the ﬂood adaptation paradigm
does not involve the intention to change the natural ﬂood regime for
ﬂood safety. Hence, it does not necessitate ﬂoodwater redistribution. A
paradigm shift from ﬂood prevention to ﬂood adaptation implies ret-
roﬁtting the existing built environments or designing new urban de-
velopments in ways that when ﬂooded, ﬂood loss and damage can be
avoided. It requires a major shift in the focus of ﬂood hazard mitigation
from ﬂood control engineering to environmental design, i.e., urban
design, landscape architecture, and architecture. Although the im-
portant role of environmental design in ﬂood hazard mitigation has
been advocated, environmental design measures today remain merely
supplementary to structural measures. FCI remains a key staple for far
too many urban areas. Addressing the moral pitfalls of ﬂood prevention
requires
environmental design to play a much greater role in ﬂood
hazard mitigation.
But how is a paradigm shift to ﬂood adaptation possible when re-
lentless urbanization is also a principal factor behind increasing ﬂood
risks ( Alﬁeri et al., 2017 )? What are the odds of this ﬂood adaption
paradigm, when it appears to entail systemic recalibrations of every-
thing from everyday life to political formations in a spatial con ﬁgura-
tion that is both re ﬂective and responsive to the needs of this adaptive
way of life? Future research is necessary to identify speci ﬁc sub-sections
within the city that are deemed appropriate for the demonstration of
ﬂood adaption. While certain challenges and even intractable political
resistance abound for this ﬂood adaptation paradigm, the costs con-
cealed within the technological and political comfort zone of ﬂood
prevention are even more prohibitive. For this reason, the corrective
exempliﬁed by a stance of ﬂood adaptation may be the ﬁrst actual step
towards a more environmentally just approach to ﬂood safety.
References
Alﬁeri, L., Bisselink, B., Dottori, F., Naumann, G., de Roo, A., Salamon, P., ... Feyen, L.
(2017). Global projections of river ﬂood risk in a warmer world. Earth’s Future, 5 ,
171–182.
Begg, C. (2018). Power, responsibility and justice: A review of local stakeholder parti-
cipation in European ﬂood risk management. Local Environment: International Journal
of Justice and Sustainability, 23 , 383 –397.
Bower, S. S. (2010). Natural and unnatural complexities: Flood control along Manitoba ’s
Assiniboine River. Journal of Historical Geography, 36 ,5 7 –67.
Brookes, A. (1988). Channelized rivers: Perspectives for environmental management. New
York: Wiley .
Campos, B. C., Liao, K.-H., & Yiu, E. C. Y. (2018). The displacement risks and impacts of
Hong Kong’s nonindigenous villagers: A ground theory analysis. Urban Aﬀairs Review.
Cernea, M. M. (2000). Risks, safeguards and reconstruction: A model for population
displacement and resettlement. Economic and Political Weekly, 35 (41), 3659 –3678.
Collins, T. W., Grineski, S. E., & Chakraborty, J. (2018). Environmental injustice and ﬂood
risk: A conceptual model and case comparison of metropolitan Miami and Houston,
USA. Regional Environmental Change, 18 , 311 –323.
Colten, C. E. (2007). Environmental justice in a landscape of tragedy. Technology in
Society, 29 , 173 –179.
Colten, C. E., Simms, J. R. Z., Grismore, A. A., & Hemmerling, S. A. (2018). Social justice
and mobility in coastal Louisiana, USA. Regional Environmental Change, 18 (2),
371–383.
Davy, B. (1996). Fairness as compassion: Towards a less unfair facility siting policy. Risk:
Health, Safety & Environment, 7 (2), 99 –108.
Doorn, N. (2015). The blind spot in risk ethics: Managing natural hazards. Risk Analysis,
35(3), 354 –360.
Douglas, I., Alam, K., Maghenda, M., McDonnell, Y., McLean, L., & Campbell, J. (2009).
Unjust waters: Climate change, ﬂooding and the urban poor in Africa. In J. Bicknell,
D. Dodman, & D. Satterthwaite (Eds.). Adapting cities to climate change: Understanding
and addressing the development challenges (pp. 201 –223). London: Earthscan .
Edmonds,
D. (2014). Would you kill the fat man? The Trolley problem and what your answer
tells us about right and wrong. Princeton: Princeton University Press .
Fielding, J. (2007). Environmental injustice or just the lie of the land: An investigation of
the socio-economic class of those at risk from ﬂooding in England and Wales.
Sociological Research Online, 12 ,4 .
Green, C. (2010). Towards sustainable ﬂood risk management. International Journal of
Disaster Risk Science, 1 ,3 3 –43.
Hansson, S. O. (2013). The ethics of risk: Ethical analysis in an uncertain world. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan .
Hardin, R. (2003). Indeterminacy and society. Princeton: Princeton University Press .
Hartmann, T. (2011). Clumsy ﬂoodplains: Responsive land policy for extreme ﬂoods.
Burlington: Ashgate .
Hartmann, T., & Driessen, P. (2017). The ﬂood risk management plan: Towards spatial
water governance. Journal of Flood Risk Management, 10 , 145 –154.
Johnson, C., Penning-Rowsell, E., & Parker, D. (2007). Natural and imposed injustices:
The challenges in implementing ‘fair’ ﬂood risk management policy in England.
Geographical Journal, 173 , 374 –390.
Kaufmann, M., Priest, S. J., & Leroy, P. (2018). The undebated issue of justice: Silent
discourses in Dutch ﬂood risk management. Regional Environmental Change, 18 (2),
325–337.
Laituri, M. J. (2000). Cultural perspectives of ﬂooding. In E. E. Wohl (Ed.). Inland ﬂood
hazards: Human, riparian, and aquatic communities (pp. 451 –468). Cambridge:
Cambridge University .
Lebel, L., & Sinh, B. T. (2007). Politics of ﬂoods and disasters. In L. Lebel, J. Dore, R.
Daniel, & Y. S. Koma (Eds.). Democratizing water governance in the mekong region (pp.
37–54). Chiang Mai: Mekong Press .
Lebel, L., & Sinh, B. T. (2009). Risk reduction or redistribution? Flood management in the
Mekong region. Asian Journal of Environment and Disaster Management, 1 ,2 5 –41.
Li, W. G., & Li, M. (1986). When a village disappears on the map. Ren Jien Magazine, 4 ,
18–31
[in Chinese].
Liao, K.-H. (2014). From ﬂood control to ﬂood adaptation: A case study on the Lower
Green River Valley and the City of Kent in King County, Washington. Natural Hazards,
71, 723 –750.
Liao, K.-H., Tuan, A. L., & Nguyen, K. V. (2016). Urban design principles for ﬂood resi-
lience: Learning from the ecological wisdom of living with ﬂoods in the Vietnamese
Mekong Delta. Landscape and Urban Planning, 155 ,6 9 –78.
Lynn, K. (2017). Rising recreancy: Flood control and community relocation in Houston,
TX, from an environmental justice perspective. Local Environment, 22 , 321 –334.
MEA: Ministry of Economic A ﬀairs (1973). Revised ﬂood control plan for Shezidao and
Wuku. Taiwan: Ministry of Economic A ﬀairs [in Chinese].
O’Hare, P., & White, I. (2018). Beyond ‘just’ ﬂood risk management: The potential
for—And limits to —Alleviating ﬂood disadvantage. Regional Environmental Change,
18(2), 385 –396.
Owen, G. (2012). Move your city: Ethics, place and risk in the reconstruction of New
Orleans. The International Journal of the Constructed Environment, 2 (1), 23 –35.
Penning-Rowsell, E. C., & Pardoe, J. (2012). Who bene ﬁts and who loses from ﬂood risk
reduction? Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy, 30 , 448 –466.
Penz, P., Drydyk, J., & Bose, P. S. (2011). Displacement by development: Ethics, rights and
responsibilities. New York: Cambridge University Press .
Pinter, N., Hutho ﬀ, F., Dierauer, J., Remo, J. W. F., & Damptz, A. (2016). Modeling re-
sidual ﬂood risk behind levees, Upper Mississippi River, USA. Environmental Science &
Policy, 58 , 131 –140.
Rittel,
H. W. J., & Webber, M. M. (1973). Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy
Sciences, 4 , 155 –169.
Roth, D., & Warner, J. (2009). Rural solutions for threats to urban areas. Built environment,
35, 545 –562.
Sandel, M. J. (2010). Justice: What ’s the right thing to do? New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux.
Scherer, D. (1990). Introduction. In D. Scherer (Ed.). Upstream/downstream: Issues in en-
vironmental ethics (pp. 3 –18). Philadelphia: Temple University Press .
Schlosberg, D. (2007). Deﬁning environmental justice: Theories, movements, and nature.
Oxford: Oxford University Press .
Taipei City Government (2010). An analysis of the bene ﬁts of the development of Shezidao
and its impact on the Taipei Area Flood Control Plan. [in Chinese] .
Taipei City Government (2018). Rezoning of the master plan of Shezidao, Shilin District,
Taipei City. [in Chinese].
Thaler, T., & Hartmann, T. (2016). Justice and ﬂood risk management: Reﬂ ecting on
diﬀerent approaches to distribute and allocate ﬂood risk management in Europe.
Natural Hazards, 83 , 129 –147.
Thaler, T., Zischg, A., Keiler, M., & Fuchs, S. (2018). Allocation of risk and
beneﬁts—Distributional justices in mountain hazard management. Regional
Environmental Change, 18 , 353 –365.
Tobin, G. A. (1995). The levee love a ﬀair: A stormy relationship. Water Resources Bulletin,
31, 359 –367.
Walker, G. (2012). Environmental justice: Concepts, evidence and politics. Abingdon,
Oxfordshire: Routledge .
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
44

[[PAGE 10]]
Walker, G., & Burningham, K. (2011). Flood risk, vulnerability and environment justice:
Evidence and evaluation of inequality in a UK context. Critical Social Policy, 31 ,
216–240.
Wang, C.-H., & Lin, C.-H. (2013). The governance and transformation of urban natures-
the case of Erchong Floodway in New Taipei City, Taiwan. A radical quarterly in Social
Studies, 92 ,3 5 –71.
WRPC-MEA: Water Resources Planning Committee (1970). Evaluation report on ﬂood
control scheme for Taipei Area. Taiwan: Ministry of Economic A ﬀairs [in Chinese].
Yang, L. (2016). A forgotten Island, prisoned for half a century. New Taipei City: Walkers
Cultural [in Chinese] .
K.-H. Liao, et al. Landscape and Urban Planning 189 (2019) 36–45
45