[[PAGE 1]]
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Flood risk assessments at different spatial scales
H. de Moel 1 & B. Jongman 1 & H. Kreibich2 & B. Merz 2 &
E. Penning-Rowsell3 & P. J . Wa rd1
Received: 21 August 2014 / Accepted: 8 April 2015 / Published online: 22 May 2015
# The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Managing flood risk, i.e. both the hazard and the potential consequences, is an
important aspect of adapting to global change and has gained much traction in recent decades.
As a result, a priori flood risk assessments have become an important part of flood manage-
ment practices. Many methodologies have been set up, ranging from global risk assessments
for the world as a whole, to local assessments for a particular stretch of a river/coast or small
town. Most assessment frameworks generally follow a similar approach, but there are also
notable differences between assessments at different spatial scales. This review article exam-
ines these differences, for instance those related to the methodology, use of assessments and
uncertainties. From this review, future research needs are identified in order to improve flood
risk assessments at different scales. At global/continental scale, there is a clear need for
harmonised information on flood defences to improve assessments. Furthermore, inclusions
of indirect economic effects at the macro-/meso-scale would give a better indication of the total
effects of catastrophic flooding. At the meso-/micro-scale, there is an urgent need to improve
our understanding of the effects of flooding on critical infrastructures, given their importance
to society, the economy, emergency management and reconstruction. An overarching theme at
all scales is the validation of flood risk assessments, which is often limited. More detailed post-
disaster information would allow for improved calibration, validation and thus performance of
flood risk models. Lastly, the link between spatial scales also deserves attention, for instance
up- or downscaling methodologies.
Keywords Flood risk. Adaptation. Risk assessment. Spatial scales
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890
DOI 10.1007/s11027-015-9654-z
* H. de Moel
hans.de.moel@vu.nl
1 Institute for Environmental Studies, VU University, Amsterdam, Netherlands
2 GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences, Helmholtz Centre Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany
3 Flood Hazard Research Centre, Middlesex University, London, UK

[[PAGE 2]]
1 Introduction
Time and again, floods around the world illustrate the devastating impact they can have on
societies. In October 2012 super storm Sandy wreaked havoc in New Y ork and New Jersey,
United States of America (USA) causing roughly US$60 billion damage (Aerts et al. 2013a,
b), and in June 2013 central Europe saw floods in the Elbe and Danube basins, causing a loss
of approximately €12 billion and dozens of fatalities (Schröter et al. 2015;M u n i c h2013).
Managing this risk is important from both a societal and economic perspective in order to
reduce damages and losses and to minimise or avoid human suffering. With risk being a
combination of the hazard and its potential consequences, flood risk can thus be managed by
reducing the probability or magnitude of a flood (the hazard) or by reducing the consequences
it may cause. In the last couple of decades, the concept of managing flood risk has gained
much traction (Hooijer et al. 2004;P e t r o we ta l .2006; V an Alphen and V an Beek2006;I P C C
2012;U N I S D R2013), which is exemplified by the European Floods Directive, which was
adopted in 2007 (2007/60/EC). This approach of managing risk takes a more holistic view, by
explicitly covering all aspects (e.g. prevention, mitigation, preparation, response, recovery) of
the disaster management cycle (Lumbruso 2007; De Moel and Aerts 2008; Kreibich et al.
2014), instead of focussing mainly on flood prevention. As such, flood risk management is
becoming an important process for adapting to a constantly changing environment due to, for
instance, climate change, population growth and economic change.
Adequate management of floods is reliant on a priori assessments of flood events and their
consequences. Such assessments give insights into what can be expected, and thereby open up
the discussion on how to tackle such situations. Moreover, such assessment frameworks can be
used to evaluate measures in a standardised way, support decision-making on possible
measures that can be taken and prioritise areas where action is required. Over the past couple
of decades, a large amount of research has focused on developing such flood assessments at
various spatial scales, for a variety of purposes. Whilst the central approach is quite general
between different assessments, there are notable differences in terms of methodology and the
use of those assessments. Such differences are the result of many factors, including data
availability and the applicability of methods at different scales. However, with increasing
computational capacity and a wider availability of detailed data, opportunities are arising to
enable the scaling up of detailed methods to larger scales or to start using global methods for
more local purposes in data scarce regions. For this, it is necessary to understand the different
methodologies, limitations and uses of flood risk assessments at different spatial scales.
This review paper aims to provide an overview of the current state and development of
quantitative flood risk assessments at different scales and to facilitate learning from assessments
at different scales. In the remainder of this review, we will first provide a general framework of
flood risk assessments and then address the methods, limitations and uses of assessments at four
different scales (supra-national, macro, meso, micro). An overview of assessment characteris-
tics at different scales will then be discussed before providing the main lessons learned and
identifying future research needs for different scales and for flood risk assessments generally.
2 Flood risk assessments
Assessing flood risk is an interdisciplinary task, combining various sources and types of
information and models. Such assessments attempt to estimate, a priori, what possible flood
866 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 3]]
events may look like (i.e. flood extent and inundation depth), how probable they are and what
are the possible consequences of such a flood may be. In engineering and natural sciences, the
conceptual framework followed is that risk is a function of hazard, exposure and vulnerability
(Kron 2002; UNISDR 2013), though concepts are sometimes differently interpreted by
different researchers (Klijn et al. 2015).
Flood risk assessments start with an assessment of the flood hazard, which indicates the
probability and intensity of a possible event (hazard assessment; e.g. Pappenberger et al.2012;
Alfieri et al. 2013). This hazard information can be overlaid with socio-economic information,
such as land use data, building datasets, information on population, regional gross domestic
product (GDP), etc. Doing so will give an indication of what is actually exposed to flooding
(i.e. exposure assessment; e.g. Jongman et al. 2012a). Information on the exposure can be
combined with information on the vulnerability of such assets (for instance through damage
curves) and the hazard characteristics to estimate the potential damage (damage assessment;
e.g. Kreibich and Thieken 2008; De Moel and Aerts 2011). A generalised procedure to
estimate direct monetary damage consists of the following: (1) Classification of elements at
risk by pooling them into homogeneous classes. (2) Exposure analysis and asset assessment by
describing the number and type of elements at risk and by estimating their asset value. (3)
Susceptibility (or vulnerability) analysis by relating the relative damage of the elements at risk
to the flood impact (Merz et al.2010a, b). When total damages are calculated for several events
with different probabilities, an expected annual damage can be calculated, usually referred to
as risk (risk assessment; e.g. Aerts et al. 2013a, b;F a l t e re ta l .2015a)( F i g .1). Note that there
are various other factors that influence flood risk, which may or may not be included in flood
risk assessment as they are sometimes difficult to include in a quantitative analysis. Such
factors include warning time, preparedness, social and economic resistance, health, etc.
2.1 Hazard
Generally, flood assessments start with assessing the possible danger of the physical flooding
itself or flood hazard. There are many dimensions (duration, velocity, debris, water depth, etc.)
to the flood hazard, which makes this far from straightforward. Moreover, the methodology for
such an assessment depends very much on the scale and specific characteristics, such as the
geographic setting and the presence of defensive structures, the purpose of the assessment and
the available data. The basis of each hazard assessment is, however, adequate observational
data. Such observational data can be based on recorded flood events (i.e. derived from satellite
imagery—Schumann et al. 2009; Schumann and Di Baldassarre 2010) but often entails time
series of precipitation, river discharge, water levels at the coast, etc. Such time series,
sometimes extended using stochastic weather generators (e.g. Te Linde et al. 2010a; Falter
et al. 2015a; Ailliot et al. 2015), are subsequently used to derive probabilities and correspond-
ing magnitudes of possible events. This can be done directly using frequency analyses to
derive return periods for certain water levels (e.g. D ’Onofrio et al. 1999) or discharges (e.g.
Cunnane 1988). However, observational data, or data derived from observations (e.g. inter-
polated maps such as Adam and Lettenmaier 2003;H a r r i se ta l .2013), can also be used as
inputs in simulation models (hydrological and hydraulic models) which represent the flood
generation processes in catchments and river systems. A typical example is the use of observed
rainfall data as input for a hydrological catchment model. Such approaches have the advantage
that hazard parameters can be estimated in space more easily, although there is also a variety of
regional flood frequency analysis approaches with the aim of estimating flood hazard at
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 867

[[PAGE 4]]
ungauged locations based directly on observed flood data (Hosking and Wallis 1997). Much
more information is required in the simulation model approach though, most importantly
detailed topographic, but also land cover and soil characteristics. Besides allowing for more
complete spatial coverage, using models also allows one to estimate various dimensions of the
flood hazard that can be important for the potential consequences and decision-making, such
as water depth (e.g. for determining damage to buildings), flow velocity (e.g. for determining
damage to bridges; e.g. Kreibich et al. 2009), the rate of rise (e.g. for estimating fatalities), the
flood volume (e.g. for designing flood retention measures) and the duration of inundation (e.g.
for determining damage to agricultural crops; e.g. Tapia-Silva et al. 2011).
2.2 Consequences
After the hazard assessment has been carried out, the hazard data (for example, a map of
inundation extent and depth) can be combined with information on the exposure (i.e. the
Fig. 1 Conceptual overview of general flood assessment (Merz and Thieken 2004)
868 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 5]]
people, property, systems or other elements assets present in the hazard zones that can be
subjected to potential losses; UNISDR 2013). This can take various forms, but often datasets
on population, land use, buildings, etc. are used in this respect (Wünsch et al.2009), or remote
sensing data is utilised (Gerl et al. 2014). Such exposure assessments can be binary (i.e.
affected or not affected the flood —Jongman et al. 2012a), or can involve various gradations,
for instance, by taking various water depths into account (De Moel et al.2011). Such exposure
estimates usually relate to physical assets and people. However, also other exposure infor-
mation can be incorporated, such as cultural values (using datasets on monuments and/or
cultural heritage sites), parameters associated with indirect effects (using for instance
exposure of infrastructure networks or GDP production) or long-term changes in exposure
(related to population growth and economic development; e.g. Elmer et al. 2012;
Tapia-Silva et al. 2011).
Many flood assessments estimate the direct consequences in monetary terms (Merz et al.
2010a). By doing so, different types of consequences are expressed in a single figure (e.g.
euros/dollars/£), which allows for easy comparisons, for instance, between areas, over time,
with other hazards or comparative evaluations of the effect of different measures (in terms of
how much damage is reduced). Many flood damage assessments rely on water depth as main
indicator of the hazard, though sometimes distinctions are made based on, for instance, the
duration of flood (e.g. the ‘Multi-Coloured Manual’ in the United Kingdom (UK) Penning-
Rowsell et al. 2013) or the flow velocity (e.g. HAZUS in the USA Scawthorn et al.2006). This
is usually done by differentiating different damage curves or combining different hazard
characteristics into a new indicator (e.g. estimating the stability of buildings using velocity-
stage-damage curves; Middelmann-Fernandes2010). This is different, however, for damage to
agricultural crops, for which the time of flooding (i.e. season) and the duration are decisive as
opposed to water depth (Tapia-Silva et al. 2011).
The most commonly used approach to assess direct damages is based on depth-damage
curves (Smith 1994;M e r ze ta l .2007). Such curves denote the vulnerability to flooding by
relating the water depth to the damage this will cause to a specific type of asset, economic
sector or land use category (see e.g. Merz et al. 2004; Freni et al. 2010;D eM o e la n d
Aerts 2011). However, not all approaches are based on damage curves. For example,
Booysen et al. ( 1999) used questionnaires to estimate damages to industries in a case study
area. Such an approach is particularly useful for categories that are very heterogeneous and
need specific details (such as industrial land use). In addition, some multi-parameter
models have been developed including: a conceptual model in the UK (Nicholas et al.
2001), a multi-variate regression model to estimate losses in private households in Japan
(Zhai et al. 2005) and rule based models for loss estimation to companies and private
households in Germany (Kreibich et al. 2010; Elmer et al. 2010). Such multi-parameter
methods have the advantage that additional important factors that are often difficult to
predict (e.g. warning time, contamination and resilience) can sometimes still be included in
the assessment.
The development of probabilistic damage models seems to be an innovative enhancement,
since they inherently provide quantitative information about model uncertainty. Probabilistic
models using bagging decision trees or Bayesian networks have been successfully validated
(V ogel et al. 2013; Merz et al. 2013; Schröter et al. 2014). These approaches have the
advantage that more variables (than just inundation depth) can be included in the damage
assessment and have shown the importance of factors like contamination, precaution and
duration of the inundation (Thieken et al. 2005;M e r ze ta l .2013).
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 869

[[PAGE 6]]
2.3 Risk
When several damage assessments are performed for events with different probabilities, the
results can be combined to derive an estimate of the monetary risk per year, also known as
expected annual damage (EAD) or (average) annual loss (AAL). This is done by integrating
the damage estimates over their probability of occurrence and corresponds graphically to the
area underneath an exceedance-probability loss (EPL) curve (Meyer et al. 2009;W a r de ta l .
2011). Note that the probability used to integrate (i.e. the probability axis of an EPL curve) has
to be associated with the probability of a certain amount of damage occurring, which is not
necessarily the same as the probability associated with certain hydraulic conditions such as
water levels (see e.g. Aerts et al. 2013a, b). Often the hazard probability is directly used
though.
Such risk assessments thus combine the consequences of flood events of different magni-
tudes. They provide input for various follow-up activities, most notably cost-benefit analyses
of measures (e.g. Saint-Geours et al. 2013) but also setting insurance schemes and premiums
(e.g. Aerts and Botzen 2011). Whilst damage per year (which equals the integral under the
EPL; Fig. 1) is a rather objective indicator for risk, it should be noted that it may not be
appropriate for all circumstance as two situations with the same damage per year are not
necessarily the same (Merz et al.2009) because the shape of the risk curve can be different and
is also an important characteristic of risk (see e.g. Bouwer 2010; Foudi et al. 2015). For
instance, a situation with high probabilities, but low damage (no levees, few or adapted
buildings) and a situation with low probabilities but high damage (many buildings protected
by levees) could have the same expected annual damage. However, such situations are still
perceived differently by various actors (insurers, society; e.g. Seifert et al. 2013). The first
situation relates to relatively small events occurring frequently, which are easier to handle by
emergency services and to cover by insurance, whilst the second situation entails very rare, but
more catastrophic, events that could be very difficult to control and would instantly be a huge
financial burden.
2.4 Types of consequences
When assessing potential consequences of flooding, it is of course of key importance which
consequences are considered and which ones are not (Meyer et al. 2013;K r e i b i c he ta l .2014).
Generally, consequences of natural disasters are differentiated into four groups, based on two
criteria: direct vs. indirect consequences and tangible vs. intangible consequences (e.g.
Messner et al. 2007; Jonkman et al. 2008). Direct consequences relate directly to the area
and time of the flood event, whilst indirect consequences are often associated with conse-
quences occurring outside the flooded area, or after the flood event. Tangible and intangible
consequences refer to effects that can be monetized (tangible) and effects that are much more
elusive to quantify or even monetize.
Recently, it has been recognised that catastrophic floods can have substantial effects on the
economy, also outside the area affected and after the flood event (Okuyama and Santos 2014).
Estimating these economic losses is far from straightforward, as even fewer observed data are
available than for direct losses. Flood losses in one area or sector will affect other areas and
sectors. Therefore, economic models are usually used, such as input-output or general equi-
librium models (Rose and Liao 2005; Steenge and Bockarjova 2007; Hallegatte 2008;L ie ta l .
2013). Alternatively, a certain percentage of the direct damages can be taken as an indication of
870 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 7]]
indirect losses, often based on the relevant modelling studies. Such estimates typically range
from 30 up to 100 % of the direct damages and is generally thought to increase with the
severity of the flood event (Hallegatte2008;K o k se ta l .2014a, b). Some empirical evidence on
indirect losses is provided by Toyoda ( 2008), who estimated the indirect losses of the great
earthquake in Kobe in 1995 at roughly the same size (i.e. 100 %) as the direct losses. Such
indirect economic losses are very case and site specific though.
2.5 Uncertainty
As with any quantitative modelling assessment, flood risk assessments are surrounded by
uncertainties (Merz and Thieken 2005; 2009). The nature of this uncertainty can result from
different types of uncertainty. Broadly speaking, this can be aleatory, epistemic or ontological
uncertainty. Aleatory uncertainty relates to natural variation in the system (such as variation in
rainfall over time, or spatial variation in roughness characteristics) and can in principle not be
reduced. Epistemic uncertainty relates to inadequate knowledge of the system, resulting in the
analyst having to make assumptions on how the system works. This uncertainty can, theoret-
ically, be reduced with increased knowledge of the system, although this is in practice
sometimes not easy. Lastly, ontological uncertainty refers to factors missing out of the analysis,
i.e. incompleteness. This could be considered a subset of epistemic uncertainty, but it is much
more difficult to include in formal uncertainty analyses.
3 Assessments at different scales
Different scales call for different methods when it comes to assessing flood risks. In addition,
assessments at different scales have different uses. In this section, we will touch upon these
different scales. Drawing upon examples from international literature, the characteristics of the
flood hazard assessment will be described, as well as the way consequences are assessed,
which uncertainties are important and for what the assessments at different scales are used for.
We distinguish the supra-national, macro-, meso- and micro-scale. Obviously, the distinc-
tion between these scales is subjective. The supra-national scale concerns assessments of the
entire globe or continent, encompassing a plethora of countries and river basins. The macro-
scale refers to assessments of entire countries, for which usually consistent (national) data are
present, but consists of many watersheds. The meso-scale is generally sub-national, referring
to a certain province, watershed or large city. The micro-scale is the smallest scale considered,
which relates to a town or specific river stretch.
3.1 Supra-national (global, continental) scale
3.1.1 Importance and use
Over the last decade, there has been an increased demand from diverse stakeholders for flood
risk assessments at continental to global scales. For instance, the United Nations International
Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) now coordinates the production of the two-
yearly Global Assessment Report (GAR) on Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR 2009, 2011,
2013). Continental flood risk assessments are important in Europe to support climate change
adaptation policies (V an Renssen 2013) and develop robust public disaster relief funds
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 871

[[PAGE 8]]
(Hochrainer et al. 2010). As disaster risk modelling capabilities improve continuously, appli-
cability and interest in global scale flood risk assessment is also increasing. For example,
international financing institutes need strategic assessments of flood risk at the global scale for
developing risk profiles and deciding where to invest in risk reduction activities, the (re-)
insurance industry requires global scale assessments to assess their current and future risk
portfolios, multi-national companies are interested in global scale risk assessments to identify
possible risks in their supply chains and intra-national institutes can use the data for monitoring
progress in risk reduction activities, such as those related to the implementation of the Hyogo
Framework for Action (UNISDR 2007).
3.1.2 Method
An increasing number of scientific efforts have contributed to the understanding of trends in
flood risk and the modelling of current and future risk at continental and global scales. Several
studies (e.g. Barredo 2009; Bouwer 2011; Neumayer and Barthel 2011) have directly analysed
past trends in flood losses. Generally, these studies have found that observed disaster losses
have increased over the last half-century, with changes in exposure (e.g. wealth and population
growth) being the main driver (IPCC 2012;M e r ze ta l . 2012;K u n d z e w i c ze ta l .2013).
However, Gall et al. (2011) found evidence of non-exposure driven increases in disaster losses
(of various natural hazards) in the USA over the period 1960 –2009, pointing to changes in
hazard frequency/intensity as possible drivers of risk.
In recent years, several models have been developed to assess flood hazards, potential
damages and risk at large scales. Methods have been developed and applied to assess flood
hazard (Pappenberger et al. 2012; Rojas et al. 2012), exposure (Jongman et al. 2012a)a n d / o r
flood risk (Dilley et al. 2005; Hirabayashi et al. 2013; Feyen et al. 2012;W a r de ta l .2013,
2014; Winsemius et al. 2013; Arnell and Lloyd-Hughes 2014) at continental and global scales.
Some of these have been combined with projections of changes in hazard and/or exposure to
assess the potential change in flood risk (or flood exposure) in the future (e.g. Jongman et al.
2012a; Hirabayashi et al. 2013; Rojas et al. 2013; Arnell and Lloyd-Hughes 2014;J o n g m a n
et al. 2014). The risk of coastal flooding has been assessed similarly on a global scale, by
modelling storm surges heights, determining potential inundation areas using elevation
data and using macro-economic and population data to determine the exposure in major
coastal cities (e.g. Nicholls et al. 2008; Hallegatte et al. 2013). The results of the latter
studies show that the increase in exposure to coastal flooding alone could lead to an
eightfold increase in losses, with climate change potentially adding further to the increase
in risk.
3.1.3 Uncertainty and validation
The accurate representation of vulnerability and flood protection has been the largest obstacle
in large-scale flood risk assessment (Jongman et al. 2012a; Feyen et al. 2012). First efforts to
include flood protection measures in risk assessment have been presented on European
(Jongman et al. 2014) and global (Hallegatte et al. 2013,W a r de ta l . 2013) scales. These
studies show that the flood protection standards assumed in the modelling process have a large
effect on the computed risk estimates, which illustrates the benefits of adaptation but also
highlights that this ontological uncertainty in flood protection levels can strongly affect model
outcomes. In addition, new research suggests that natural ecosystems should be incorporated
872 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 9]]
as important means of protection against coastal (Arkema et al. 2013) and river (Stuerck et al.
2014)f l o o d s .
V alidation of global and continental flood assessments is generally difficult as the scale is
much larger than that of a single event. Given the rarity of flood events, establishing a meaningful
compilation of relevant events with a full geographic spread would require hundreds of years of
detailed observations of flood events, during which boundary conditions change (i.e. encroach-
ment of floodplain, river training, weirs) (Lammersen et al.2002). Theoretically, it is possible to
derive observed estimates of global or continental flood risk using comprehensive databases of
historical damaging events. This may not be available for all areas and would require the
integration and harmonisation of databases from many different sources, for instance re-
insurers and national governments. The glob al data bases NatCatSERVICE from Munich Re
(www.munichre.com) and EM-DA T database
1 are the most well-known databases that strive
towards such a goal. An overview of event-speci fic databases for natural hazards on global,
regional or national scale is provided by Tschoegl et al. (2006)a n dU N D P(2013).
3.2 Macro (national) scale
3.2.1 Importance and use
Many countries have flood maps for their main cities and other vulnerable areas, particularly in
Europe where this is stipulated by the European Union (EU) Floods Directive (2007/60/EC).
This is much less common in developing countries though. In some countries, flood risk
assessments have been performed at the national scale, meaning that a cartographic represen-
tation of flood information across the whole country has been developed, with a controlled
degree of consistency in terms of accuracy and coverage. Such national scale assessments have
a range of aims. In the USA, the national flood assessments have been performed to demarcate
the limits of their national insurance programme (Burby 2001; Michel-Kerjan and Kunreuther
2011). In the UK, the national flood mapping programme has been designed to alert the public
as to the risks that they face in their locality —by a web-based release of the maps —and to
identify the total risk facing the country, in order to determine investment priorities and scale of
government grant for flood risk management measures (Environment Agency 2009). In the
Netherlands, decision-making on risk management strategies and assessing climate change
impacts are the core reasons for the national flood risk mapping programme (such as
Waterveiligheid 21e Eeuw;K i n d2011). In France, the identification of risk areas across the
nation is fundamentally concerned with controlling development in such areas and also for
investment prioritisation.
The different objectives of such national assessments generally lead to different scales
within the national programme. For instance, national-scale climate change assessments are
often quite broadbrush (Evans et al. 2004; Adaptation Sub-Committee 2012). Because in
France, national maps are related to controlling local developments, a considerably greater
level of detail is required —not least because decisions made based on that information are
likely to be contested. The purpose of a national flood map does not only affect detail but also
the indicators to be mapped. For project prioritisation, a number of return periods need to be
represented on the map (Penning-Rowsell et al. 2013), whereas for spatial planning, just the
flood extent of a design return period may be sufficient (DCLG 2010). This, then, raises the
1 http://www.emdat.be/
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 873

[[PAGE 10]]
question what information the national flood maps should contain. Ideally, they should map
extent (which is common) but also flood depths, velocities and similar information for future
flood risks if climate change is exacerbating the hazard. The UK ’sm o s tr e c e n tn a t i o n a lf l o o d
modelling is seeking to achieve this level of detail but this is likely to be expensive when
applied nationwide.
3.2.2 Method
In terms of methodology, different approaches can be found. Sometimes, risk assessments
at this scale are performed all at once, using a single model, applied nationwide (see Hall
et al. ( 2003, 2005) and Evans et al. ( 2004) for the UK). In these cases, the consistency of
the results between areas may be high, but the resources needed to model floods across a
whole country are not to be underestimated. Moreover, given the large area, it is usually
not possible to cover the entire territory with 2D hydraulic modelling and more simplified
approaches are used, similarly to supra-national scale assessments. In order to estimate
consequences, land use maps are used and combined with stage-damage curves, similar to
meso-scale assessments. The resolution of such assessments is generally in the order of
magnitude of 100- to1000-m grid cells. Another approach is to compile national flood
maps bottom up as a composite of locally available information or as an aggregation of
various meso-scale assessments (e.g. FLORIS in the Netherlands; RWS-DWW 2005).
Whilst this increases the detail of the information and correspondingly enhances potential
uses of a national-scale assessment, there is likely to be more inconsistency across the
country.
3.2.3 Uncertainty and validation
Like supra-national flood assessments, verification or validation of the results is an issue with
national assessments. No country is likely to have records of flood extent and other details of
floods of long recurrence interval across the whole country. Therefore, some flood information
is likely to be simulated and unverified and indeed unverifiable. One of the few examples from
10 or more years ago is for Hungary (Evans et al. 2000), where the country ’s floodplains
constitute 22.3 % of its area (compared to, for instance, 4.8 % in the UK) (Evans et al. 2000).
The results of that study show that the potential 100-year event losses could be as high as 8 %
of GDP or 35 % of the country ’s annual public expenditure budget: very high figures and a
threat to that country’s economy. Subsequent more detailed analysis of an intensively modelled
Hungarian hot spot, showed that the national-scale results overestimated risk there by a factor
of two (Evans et al. 2000).
Similarly, a detailed analysis of the UK national flood risk assessment, as conducted in
2008, also suggests that it exaggerates the flood risk facing the country by some four- or
fivefold (Penning-Rowsell2013, 2015). This may not matter in terms of prioritisation between
different locations for investment, where the risk ranking may be the same irrespective of the
absolute values, but it does lead to doubt as to the value of the risk assessment if the aggregate
results are in error to this extent. A similar comparison in the USA found that more detailed
modelling of flood risk areas, in comparison with a broad brush first estimate, showed
inundated areas reducing in size markedly as more detailed information became available,
which is problematic when one of the main aims of this mapping is to delimit the extent of risk
for insurance purposes (Cook and Merwade 2009).
874 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 11]]
3.3 Meso (regional) scale
3.3.1 Importance and use
There is also a strong need for sub-nationa l flood risk assessments, for example at
federal state level, for larger river stretches, large cities or on a basin-scale. Such meso-
scale flood risk assessments are for instance used for regional flood risk management
and mapping and in the re-insurance industry (e.g. Olsen et al. 1998; Ganoulis 2003).
For example, in Germany, the federal states are responsible for flood management.
Thus, many state authorities have undertaken flood hazard and risk assessments for
their federal state to prioritise investments in structural flood mitigation measures and
to provide hazard and risk maps for spatia l planning purposes and public awareness
raising (e.g. Sachsen, Bayern, Baden-Wür ttemberg). Risk maps as presented in the
Rhine-Atlas (ICPR 2001) are used for risk communication. Moreover, quantitative
comparisons of different risks within a community or a region are undertaken on the
basis of consistent risk assessments, such as for the city of Cologne, Germany
(Grunthal et al. 2006).
Meso-scale studies are often used to evaluate the effect of certain management measures.
Examples include the effect of retention areas on failure probabilities (V orogushyn et al.2012)
and risk (De Kok and Grossmann 2010); restoration of abandoned meanders, a bypass,
retention and reforestation (Te Linde et al. 2010b); spatial zoning and flood proofing
(Poussin et al. 2012;D eM o e le ta l . 2014a) and compartmentalisation and zoning (Koks
et al. 2014a, b). Additionally, meso-scale assessments are often used to explore future
scenarios, for instance, related to impacts of climate change (Gaslikova et al. 2011), socio-
economic growth (Bubeck et al. 2011) or both (Te Linde et al. 2011; Elmer et al. 2012).
3.3.2 Method
The most common approach for meso-scale hazard assessment is based on the assumption of
a spatially uniform return period. For example, a 100-year discharge is calculated for the
entire river network as a basis to model inundation extent and depths (e.g. ICPR 2001;
Bradbrook et al. 2005). The approach of spatially uniform return periods is very valuable if
the assessment is used to answer local questions. However, it is misleading when assessing
large-scale patterns, since it provides an unrealistic picture, overestimating meso-scale flood
risk. This problem is avoided when a set of spatially consistent synthetic flood events with
heterogeneous local return periods is generated (e.g. Rodda 2001, 2005;F a l t e re ta l .2015b).
Such stochastic flood event sets may be developed using multivariate statistical models that
consider the spatial dependence between gauges (Lamb et al. 2010;K e e fe ta l .2013)o rb y
starting with stochastic rainfall events (e.g. Rodda 2001). An alternative is a continuous
modelling of rainfall-runoff, driven by continuous climate data or climate model scenarios
(Falter et al. 2015b). An advantage of the latter is that hydrological processes influencing the
runoff are implicitly considered and the complete flood event is consistently modelled for the
whole catchment.
Physical processes like storage effects, flood attenuation or channel-floodplain interac-
tions can be covered via complementing continuous rainfall-runoff modelling with a
hydrodynamic simulation of inundation areas and water depth (Buchele et al. 2006,D e
Moel et al. 2009). Recent simplifications of fully hydrodynamic equations and reductions
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 875

[[PAGE 12]]
of computational model run time like parallelising enable 2D hydrodynamic simulations
on larger scales. Such new approaches rely on coupled 1D/2D models where the channel
flow is simulated one-dimensionally and the floodplain flows are simulated two-
dimensionally with approaches ranging from simple-volume conservative storage-filling
algorithms to fully dynamic shallow water modelling. Such meso-scale hazard assessments
have been undertaken, for instance, for the Amazon (Wilson et al. 2007), the Ob
(Biancamaria et al. 2009), the Pantanal (Da Paz et al. 2011) river basins and a 800-km
reach of the Niger (Neal et al. 2012). However, due to computational constraints and data
limitations, detailed hydrodynamic simulations are commonly avoided for meso-scale
hazard assessments (e.g. ICPR 2001;R o d d a 2005). Often simpler approaches are used
based on rating curves and water surface intersection with topographic data (e.g. Ward
et al. 2011).
Flood damage estimation on the meso-scale is commonly based on land use categories,
which are connected to particular economic sectors. Exposure estimation needs to provide
asset values also on the basis of land use units (e.g. Chen et al. 2004; Thieken et al. 2006;
Wünsch et al. 2009). Losses are then estimated by aggregated sectoral stage-damage
functions or multi-parameter models (Messner and Meyer 2006;M e r ze ta l . 2010a, b;
Kreibich et al. 2010; De Moel and Aerts 2011). Flood damage models are normally derived
from micro-scale data related to single objects (Merz et al. 2010a, b). For instance,
building-specific damage models are developed on the basis of empirical data collected
in the aftermath of a flood (e.g. Merz et al. 2004) or on the basis of synthetic data collected
by what-if analyses investigating which damage is expected in the case of certain flood
situations (e.g. Penning-Rowsell et al. 2010, 2013, Tebodin 2000). Thus, scaling procedures
for applications on the basis of land use units at the meso-scale need to be developed. For
instance, Kreibich et al. ( 2010) developed an up-scaling procedure on the basis of land
cover and geo-marketing data for flood loss estimation of companies in Germany. Tang
et al. ( 1992) present an up-scaling procedure for residential, commercial, industrial and
agricultural damage estimation based on average object areas and land use data for
Bangkok, Thailand. In some cases, individual object information is used to derive flood
damage estimates, but often this is done in an aggregated way. For instance, the HAZUS
and HIS-SSM models both work with object counts (per census block and zip code,
respectively) that are consequently considered as one unit in the damage calculation
(Scawthorn et al. 2006; Aerts et al. 2014; Kok et al. 2005).
3.3.3 Uncertainty and validation
Uncertainties of meso-scale risk assessments have recently been the subject of various
studies, addressing mainly aleatory and epistemic uncertainties (Apel et al. 2008,D eM o e l
et al. 2012; 2014a, b; Freni et al. 2010; Merz and Thieken 2009; Saint-Geours et al. 2013).
These studies illustrate the substantial uncertainty in absolute damage and risk estimates.
Important contributors to this overall uncertainty relate to the probability of extreme events,
the duration of such an event and the damage curves used to calculate the damage (see e.g.
De Moel et al. 2014b). An important consideration at this scale for embanked regions
concerns the possible failure of a levee (V orogushyn et al. 2010), especially in areas with
high safety standards and low elevations. Better validation of damage calculations is
possible in cases where actual flood events and subsequent damage inventories have taken
place (e.g. Seifert et al. 2010).
876 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 13]]
3.4 Micro (local) scale
3.4.1 Importance and use
At the local —micro—scale, flood risk assessments are undertaken with detailed information
about terrain elevation (e.g. via lidar data), hydraulic structures (e.g. dikes, weirs), building
location/type/use, etc. Such local flood risk assessments are often undertaken to optimise
investments via the evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of structural and other measures for
flood risk reduction. Other purposes are the development of hazard and risk maps supporting
the development of local flood management concepts and urban planning. Quantitative,
spatially explicit risk information enables communities, companies and people to prepare for
disasters (e.g. Takeuchi2001; Merz and Thieken 2004). Examples of flood risk analyses at the
city scale or even the sub-city scale include Cairns, Australia (Baddiley 2003); Gleisdorf,
Austria (Neuhold and Nachtnebel 2008); Eilenburg, Germany (Apel et al. 2009); Dresden,
Germany (Gerl et al. 2014;K r e i b i c he ta l .2011a); New Y ork City, USA (Aerts et al. 2013b;
2014), Ho Chi Min City, Vietnam (Lasage et al. 2014); Jakarta, Indonesia (Budiyono et al.
2015) and many more. Particularly, the distinction between meso- and micro-scale is slowly
fading, with large cities being similar in size to certain regions and developments in computing
power allowing highly detailed data to be used for larger areas.
3.4.2 Method
Hazard assessments are usually carried out using detailed 1D/2D hydraulic modelling (e.g.
Ernst et al. 2010), for which a large variety of models exists. This can consider hydraulically
important features like streets, buildings and channels (Aronica et al. 1998). Such models are
based on solving physical equations for one/two dimensional flow of water, such as the Saint
V enant equations (Aronica and Lanza2005). Usually a flood frequency analysis is applied to a
given record of discharge data of the relevant local gauge (e.g. Stedinger et al.1993) to provide
input for the hydraulic model and associate probabilities to the modelled inundation scenarios.
Alternatively, rainfall-runoff models can be used to supply input hydrographs for the hydraulic
model (as in Neuhold and Nachtnebel 2008). These hydraulic models do not only yield
inundation extents and depths but can also pr ovide additional flood indicators like flow
velocity and the rate at which the water level rises. These can be important factors in
determining the consequences of floods. For instance, flow velocity is an important
parameter when assessing erosion and the collapse of buildings and the rate of rise is
important when assessing potential fatalities. Modelling of the inundation area can be
done using a full 2D model or by coupling 1D and 2D calculations in various degrees.
For instance, the LISFLOOD-FP model links separate 1D channel flow calculations
with 2D flood propagation calculations using uniform flow formulae (Bates and de
Roo 2000).
In micro-scale assessments damage is often evaluated on an object level. For instance, in
order to estimate the damage of a municipality, damages are calculated for each affected object,
such as a building, business or school. Building-specific flood damage models are developed
by collecting flood loss data in the aftermath of a flood or by undertaking synthetic analyses
using experts, surveys or interviews (Merz et al. 2010a, b). On the basis of such empirical and
synthetic data, generalised relationships between damage and influencing parameters such as
flood characteristics and resistance factors are derived (e.g. Green 2003;P e n n i n g - R o w s e l l
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 877

[[PAGE 14]]
et al. 2010, 2013;K r e i b i c he ta l .2010). Studies have shown that estimations based on stage-
damage functions may be very uncertain since water depth and building use only explain a part
of the data variance (Merz et al. 2004;S c h r ö t e re ta l .2014). Whilst conceptually the same as
meso-scale assessments using depth-damage curves, micro-scale assessments have the poten-
tial to better differentiate generic classes (e.g. between residential or industrial buildings) as
there is less heterogeneity in such a class at the micro-scale as opposed to the meso-scale (i.e.
less variation in types of houses). Moreover, at the micro-scale, there is the possibility for site
visits and individual inspection to specify or improve damage curves. Neuhold and Nachtnebel
(2008), for instance, undertook surveys and interviews with chief operating officers for their
case study in Gleisdorf. In their experience, the interviews helped improve the quality of the
data underlying depth-damage curves remarkably. However, uncertainty remains relatively
high, so that the development of probabilistic damage models seem to be an innovative
enhancement, since they inherently provide quantitative information about the model uncer-
tainty (V ogel et al. 2013;M e r ze ta l .2013;S c h r ö t e re ta l .2014).
3.4.3 Uncertainties and validation
At the micro-scale, epistemic uncertainties with respect to hydraulic modelling become
apparent. These are usually associated with the selection of the appropriate model parameter-
ization, the consideration of dikes and dike breaches and the calibration and validation of the
models (Apel et al. 2009). V alidation of inundation extents is quite common, for instance,
against RS imagery of observed floods (Schumann et al. 2009; Schumann and Di Baldassarre
2010). Less common, though more common than at larger scales, is the validation of modelled
damages at the micro-scale, as observational data are still quite rare (Merz et al. 2010a, b). A
noticeable exception is Thieken et al. (2008), who validated FLEMOps for five municipalities
that were affected by the German floods in 1993 and 2002 and also compared their results to
those found using stage-damage curves from some other models. Similarly, Jongman et al.
(2012b) employed seven damage models on two cases (Carlisle and Eilenburg) and compared
them to observed damages for these cases. Specifically for the commercial sector, Seifert et al.
(2010) validated FLEMOcs. These results show that there is a considerable variation in results
between damage models and the absolute estimates often compare poorly to the observed
damages.
4 Discussion and comparison across scales
The preceding sections illustrate that there are considerable differences in the methodology and
purpose of flood risk assessments at different scales (Table 1). Methodology and purpose are
very much linked. Large-scale (supra-national, macro-) assessments are less detailed in terms
of lower spatial resolution and generate more generalised information on potential conse-
quences. However, this does allow for a methodologically consistent assessment over the
entire area of interest, for instance in the case of national insurance or international re-
insurance purposes. Table 1 gives an overview of the findings of the preceding section on
several characteristics at different scales.
Any assessment is usually limited to modelling a single flooding process, such as flooding
of a river valley by rising water levels (valley flooding) or the flooding of a large polder area
by water propagating through it from a single source (such as a dike breach). At the micro- or
878 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 15]]
Table 1 Overview of characteristics of assessments at different scales
Supra-national (global/
continental)
Macro (national) Meso (regiona l, province) Micro (local, city)
Resolution (DEM) 1 –10 km 100 m– 1k m ∼25–100 m ∼1–25 m
Hazard estimation -Global river flood model
-Surge heights (coastal)
-Generic flood model
-Aggregation of hydraulic simulations
-Rainfal-runoff plus 2D hydraulic
modelling or simplification
-2D hydraulic modelling
Consequence estimation -Gridded GDP or population
in flood zone
-Land use and stage-damage curves -Land use and stage-damage curves -Stage-damage curves for individual
buildings
Uncertainty -Presence of flood defences
important unknown
(ontological)
-Inundation modelling at course scale
(ontological/epistemic)
-Failure of defences (epistemic)
-Probability event (aleatory)
-Damage calculation (epistemic)
-Hydraulic modelling (epistemic)
-Failure of defences (epistemic)
-Probability event (aleatory)
-Damage calculation (epistemic)
V alidation Aggregated datasets (EM-DA T,
NatCatSERVICE)
Absolute totals seem overestimated Limited to aggregate damages Possible for recent events with
well-documented damages
Academic application -Assessment
-Effect climate change and
population growth
-Assessment
-Effect climate change and population
growth
-Effect of measures
-Future developments
-Uncertainty analyses
-Effect of measures
-Evaluate different strategies
-V alidation of methodologies
Societal use -Disaster relief funds
-Re-insurance
-Multi-nationals
-National insurance programme
-Communication and awareness
-Controlling local development
-Prioritisation investments
-Support planning
-Communication and awareness
-Evaluating specific measures
-Optimise investments
-Support local management and planning
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 879

[[PAGE 16]]
meso-scale, this is much less often an issue, as the area under investigation is likely more
homogeneous. In larger-scale assessments, this can lead to erroneous results for regions where
another type of flooding process is dominant. For instance, in pan-European studies on river
flooding (e.g. Alfieri et al. 2013), results for the Netherlands usually do not seem very
plausible as it is dominated by large polder areas.
4.1 Flood protection works
The above issue is also linked to the presence of flood protection works, which seems to be a
concern at all scales. At a large scale, protection works are usually not included at all, though
there are some approaches where this is corrected by taking the integral up to a defined
protection level in the risk calculation (e.g. Feyen et al. 2012;W a r de ta l .2013). A database
on actual protection levels is however often lacking, though Hallegatte et al. ( 2013)m a d ea
first attempt for coastal cities and Jongman et al. ( 2014) developed a model to estimate
protection levels in Europe based on potential damage without protection. At a smaller scale,
there is often a considerable uncertainty on where or when such a defence may fail. At small
scales, this can be approached using the so-called fragility curves, which denote the
probability of failure given certain hydraulic conditions (e.g. V orogushyn et al. 2009). It
remains uncertain, however, to estimate failure conditions of objects for situations that they
have never faced, especially given the long length of levees and heterogeneity of their
composition and subsoil.
4.1.1 Uncertainty
Uncertainty plays a role in assessments at all scales. Besides the way protection works are
addressed, another element that is common across scales relates to uncertainty in the proba-
bility of hazard events. There is substantial aleatory uncertainty in the (relatively short) time
series of annual maxima, on which frequency distributions are based that denote the proba-
bility of an event with a specific magnitude. Model uncertainty is usually an epistemic source,
for instance, the type of distribution used to characterise the frequency has a considerable
influence (Xu et al. 2007). This is especially relevant for the assessment of extreme events on
the basis of short time series, causing large uncertainties in the extrapolation range (Apel et al.
2008). Further problems might be the violation of the underlying assumptions of stationarity
and homogeneity of the time series. Epistemic uncertainty associated with flood damage
estimates results from uncertainty in the estimation of exposed assets (e.g. due to bias in
spatial disaggregation, uncertainty of asset estimates derived from regional statistics) and from
uncertainty in the depth-damage functions (e.g. due to transfer of damage functions derived
from other regions and other flood events, disregard of many damage influencing factors, such
as flood experience, flood duration or flow velocity) (Merz and Thieken 2009). Most com-
parative uncertainty analyses have been performed at the micro- and meso-scales, identifying
key elements that affect risk assessments (e.g. Apel et al. 2008; Merz and Thieken 2009;D e
Moel et al. 2012, 2014b). The most apparent ontological uncertainty relates to large scales and
involves the presence of protection works. At smaller scales various sources of epistemic
uncertainty are important. However, it should be remembered that also at smaller scales
assessments can easily miss out on important aspects of flood risk, for instance, related to
specific sectors that may not be included (such as infrastructure), indirect economic effects or
damage-influencing factors such as experience and the preparedness of the population.
880 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 17]]
4.1.2 V alidation
Another issue that is relevant at all spatial scales concerns the validation of results. V alidation
of flood risk assessments is sparse, at all scales, mainly due to data limitations. However, the
need for validation is evident as uncertainties in flood risk estimates are generally found to be
quite large (Apel et al. 2008;D eM o e le ta l . 2012; 2014a, b; Seifert et al. 2010;P e n n i n g -
Rowsell 2013, 2015). Moreover, studies using several damage models on a single case that
include comparisons to observed damage (e.g. Apel et al. 2009; Jongman et al. 2012b)s h o w
substantial discrepancies and a large range between models. If validation of flood risk
estimates is sparse, the credibility of such estimates may be harmed. A case in point is the
apparent overestimation of risk at larger scales (Penning-Rowsell 2013, 2015). Bouwer et al.
(2009) even found that using a 100-m grid instead of a 25-m grid for the same case study area
already resulted in damage estimates up to 50 % higher, mainly because the relative share of
urban land use classes increases at a lower resolution. These studies thus suggest that
assessments using a higher level of detail result in lower estimates of risk. There can be
various reasons for this, such as the use of the full value at risk as damage, overestimating the
fraction of urban land use or using spatially uniform return periods over a large area (larger
than a single event).
4.1.3 Vulnerability
The consequences of flooding mainly relate to physical assets, with vulnerability used in the
context of how easily assets get damaged by floods (i.e. the depth-damage curves). However,
the concept of vulnerability can have a much broader meaning in the context of flooding. This
may also relate to the vulnerability of people (e.g. ill or elderly people) or the recovery capacity
of households, businesses and society. Such considerations are, however, very rarely included
in flood risk assessments at any scale. Anecdotal evidence from studies at local to regional
scales suggests that societies become less vulnerable over time. Also, several studies show that
people and societies may learn from past disasters (e.g. Burby and French 1981; Wind et al.
1999;C u t t e re ta l .2008; Kreibich and Thieken 2009; Y amamura2010; Kreibich et al. 2011b),
and some studies (Hallegatte 2007; Crompton and McAneney 2008) show that damages may
decrease following a disaster because of behavioural changes and adaptation (Bubeck et al.
2012). Y et, such temporal dynamics of vulnerability ’s influence on risk are rarely studied
(except for Peduzzi et al. ( 2012) for tropical cyclone risk). Vulnerability can also relate to the
functioning of the system instead of the behaviour of individuals. In this case, the functioning
of critical infrastructure is a key, but has rarely been included in flood risk assessments, usually
resulting from a lack of knowledge and data of the system. As it has a high importance for
local policy makers, many activities are starting to investigate this at the local scale, for
instance, in the wake of Hurricane Sandy (Tsay et al. 2014).
4.1.4 Linking spatial scales
V arious issues play a role at all scales and thus warrant attention in future research. However,
there are also opportunities opening up for up- and downscaling between spatial scales. This is
driven by increased data availability and increased computing capacity. Where macro-scale
assessments are usually based on land use categories, there are now various countries with
datasets of individual buildings. Correspondingly, damage and risk methodologies, formerly
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 881

[[PAGE 18]]
mainly used at the micro-scale, can in some regions be scaled up to the meso- and macro-
scales. Building extraction techniques from remote sensing (Ehrlich and Zeug 2010; Freire
et al. 2010; Gerl et al. 2014) can further push this development by providing building
footprints across the globe. In the other direction, global flood hazard assessments are
becoming more and more detailed, allowing for opportunities to downscale. When such global
flood hazard assessments can be linked to meso-/micro-scale damage calculations, it will
become possible to perform studies to support flood risk decision-making in areas that lack
detailed hazard information. This may need further detail in global hazard assessments or a
smart way to efficiently downscale global hazard information to specific areas. When com-
bined with emerging global high-resolution datasets on exposure (such as the Global Human
Settlement Layer (GHSL) from JRC), flood protection (Hallegatte et al. 2013; Jongman et al.
2014) and damage curves (Huizinga 2007), this also allows for consistent assessment across
the globe to support global actors such as the Red Cross, World Bank and re-insurers.
5 Conclusions
This review addressed methodologies and uses of flood risk assessments at various spatial
scales. It shows that spatial scale, method and use of assessments are closely linked. At large
scales (supra-national, macro) geographically consistent assessments of flood risk aid the
international (re-) insurance industry or can be used to identify risk hotspots by international
financing institutes in order to prioritise investments. At smaller scales (meso, micro), assess-
ments can be tailored to a specific basin, city or site in order to directly support decision-
making in that area by evaluating the (cost-) effectiveness of different types of measures.
Whilst there are clear differences between scales, boundaries are slowly fading due to
increased computing power and availability of higher detailed harmonised datasets. In this
regard, the links between assessments at different scales is also emerging as a promising
subject. For instance, a well-developed link between the global and meso-/micro-scale would
enable rapid assessments of flood risk for local policy makers in regions where few data are
available. The use of global datasets for information on the hazard, exposure and vulnerability
would also allow for more consistent comparison of flood risk in cities across the globe.
This review showed that important developments have taken place in recent years in
developing global flood risk assessments. However, also at other spatial scales, many devel-
opments are taking place, for instance, at the local level which benefits greatly from the
increased availability of high-resolution data for the determination of the hazard and conse-
quences (LiDAR data, databases of buildings and uses). Through this review, important topics
for further development have been identified. At the supra-national scale (and to a lesser
degree macro-scale), there is a clear need for the inclusion of flood defences in assessments, for
which the development of a database on flood defence structures and protection levels is
necessary, as well as methodologies to incorporate these data. At the macro- and meso-scale
there are opportunities to broaden assessment from direct effects to also include indirect
economic effects. For this, better differentiation of the impact of flooding on different sectors
is necessary in order to be able to directly link results of flood assessments to economic (input-
output or general equilibrium) models. At the meso-/micro-scale, the topic of critical infra-
structure (i.e. electricity, gas, water, telecoms networks) is emerging as a key caveat, which has
a high relevance for policy makers. Insights from other disciplines, for instance, related to
terrorism (Patterson and Apostolakis2007) or volcanic (Wilson et al. 2012) risks, and network
882 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 19]]
models in general (e.g. Dueñas-Osorio et al. 2007; Winkler et al. 2011) could also prove to be
very useful for flood risk management.
Lastly, validation of flood risk models is an issue at all scales. Flood risk assessment in
absolute numbers are surrounded by considerable uncertainties, and some studies have shown
that validation in real-life cases gives mixed results (e.g. Jongman et al. 2012b). At the same
time, encouragingly good results have been reported (e.g. Aerts et al.2014). More event-based
work (as opposed to assuming a uniform return period over a large area) would allow for better
validation opportunities, but would also require increased efforts in gathering post-disaster
information on the consequences of actual floods. This would, at the same time, help to
improve the risk models themselves, for instance, because of better differentiation of depth-
damage curves and the identification of important contributing categories, such as infrastruc-
ture damage, the costs of emergency management and temporal relocation.
Acknowledgments This paper results from the Dutch research programme Knowledge for Climate ( http://
knowledgeforclimate.climateresearchnetherlands.nl/ ) funded by the Ministry of Infrastructure and the
Environment and co-subsidised by the Foundation for Applied Water Research (STOW A), Rijkswaterstaat
Zuid-Holland, the province of Zuid-Holland, the province of Zeeland and the city of Rotterdam.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and repro-
duction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Adam JC, Lettenmaier DP (2003) Adjustment of global gridded precipitation for systematic bias. J Geophys Res
108:1–14
Adaptation Sub-Committee (2012) Climate Change —is the UK preparing for flooding and water scarcity?
Committee on Climate Change, London
Aerts JCJH, Botzen WJW (2011) Climate change impacts on pricing long-term flood insurance: a comprehensive
study for the Netherlands. Glob Environ Chang 21:1045–1060
Aerts JCJH, Botzen WJW , de Moel H, Bowman M (2013a) Cost estimates for flood resilience and protection
strategies in New Y ork City. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1294:1–104
Aerts JCJH, Lin N, Botzen WJW , Emanuel K, de Moel H (2013b) Low probability flood-risk modeling for New
Y ork City. Risk Anal 33(5):772–788
Aerts JCJH, Botzen WJW , Emanuel K, Lin N, de Moel H, Michel-Kerjan E (2014) Evaluating flood resilience
strategies for coastal mega-cities. Sci V ol 344:473–475. doi:10.1126/science.1248222
Ailliot P , Allard D, Monbet V , Naveau P (2015) Stochastic weather generators: an overview of weather type
models. http://perso.univ-rennes1.fr/valerie.monbet/doc/papiers_pdf/SWGEN_review.pdf
Alfieri L, Salamon P , Bianchi A, Neal J, Bates P , Feyen L (2013) Advances in pan-European flood hazard
mapping. Hydrol Process. doi:10.1002/hyp.9947
Apel H, Merz B, Thieken AH (2008) Quantification of uncertainties in flood risk assessments. Int J River Basin
Manag 6:149–162
Apel H, Aronica GT, Kreibich H, Thieken AH (2009) Flood risk analyses—how detailed do we need to be? Nat
Hazards 49:79–98. doi:10.1007/s11069-008-9277-8
Arkema KK, Guannel G, V erutes G, Wood SA, Guerry A, Ruckelshaus M, Kareiva P , Lacayo M, Silver JM (2013)
Coastal habitats shield people and property from sea-level rise and storms. Nat Clim Chang 3:913–918
Arnell NW , Lloyd-Hughes B (2014) The global-scale impacts of climate change on water resources and flooding
under new climate and socio-economic scenarios. Clim Chang 122:127 –140. doi: 10.1007/s10584-013-
0948-4
Aronica GT, Lanza LG (2005) Drainage efficiency in urban areas: a case study. Hydrol Process 19:1105 –1119
Aronica G, Nasello C, Tucciarelli T (1998) A 2D multilevel model for flood propagation in flood affected areas.
ASCE J Water Res Plan Manag 124(4):210–217
Baddiley P (2003) The flood risk in Cairns. Nat Hazards 30(2):155 –164
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 883

[[PAGE 20]]
Barredo JI (2009) Normalised flood losses in Europe: 1970 –2006. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 9:97 –104
Bates PD, de Roo APJ (2000) A simple raster-based model for flood inundation simulation. J Hydrol 236:54–77
Biancamaria S, Bates PD, Boone A, Mognard NM (2009) Large-scale coupled hydrologic and hydraulic
modelling of the Ob River in Siberia. J Hydrol 379:136 –150
Booysen HJ, Viljoen MF , de Villiers duT G (1999) Methodology for the calculation of industrial flood damage
and its application to an industry in V ereeniging. Water SA 25(1):41–46
Bouwer LM (2010) Disasters and climate change —analysis and methods for projecting future losses from
extreme weather. Ph.D. dissertation, Faculty of Earth and Life Science, VU University Amsterdam,
Netherlands. http://www.ivm.vu.nl/en/Images/bouwer_thesis_print_tcm53-190387.pdf
Bouwer LM (2011) Have disaster losses increased due to anthropogenic climate change? Bull Am Meteorol Soc
92:39–46. doi:10.1175/2010BAMS3092.1
Bouwer LM, Bubeck P , Wagtendonk AJ, Aerts JCJH (2009) Inundation scenarios for flood damage evaluation in
polder areas. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 9:1995 –2007. doi:10.5194/nhess-9-1995-2009
Bradbrook K, Waller S, Morris D (2005) National floodplain mapping: datasets and methods —160,000 km in
12 months. Nat Hazards 36:103–123
Bubeck P , de Moel H, Bouwer LM, Aerts JCJH (2011) How reliable are projections of future flood damage? Nat
Hazards Earth Syst Sci 11:3293–3306. doi:10.5194/nhess-11-3293-2011
Bubeck P , Botzen WJW , Kreibich H, Aerts JCJH (2012) Long-term development and effectiveness of private
flood mitigation measures: an analysis for the German part of the river Rhine. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 12:
3507–3518
Buchele B, Kreibich H, Kron A, Thieken A, Ihringer J, Oberle P , Merz B, Nestmann F D2006] Flood-risk
mapping: contributions towards an enhanced assessment of extreme events and associated risks. Nat Hazards
Earth Syst Sci 6:485–503, http://www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/6/485/2006
Budiyono B, Aerts JCJH, Brinkman J, Marfai MA, Ward PJ (2015) Flood risk assessment for delta mega-cities: a
case study of Jakarta. Nat Hazards 75:389 –413. doi:10.1007/s11069-014-1327-9
Burby RJ (2001) Flood insurance and floodplain management: the US experience. Glob Environ Chang Part B:
Environ Hazards 3:111–122. doi:10.1016/S1464-2867(02)00003-7
Burby RJ, French SP (1981) Coping with floods: the land use management paradox. J Am Plan Assoc 47(3):
289–300
Chen K, McAneney J, Blong R, Leigh R, Hunter L, Magill C (2004) Defining area at risk and its effect in
catastrophe loss estimation: a dasymetric mapping approach. Appl Geogr 24:97–117
Cook A, Merwade V (2009) Effect of topographic data, geometric configuration and modeling approach on flood
inundation mapping. J Hydrol 377:131–42
Crompton RP , McAneney KJ (2008) Normalised Australian insured losses from meteorological hazards: 1967–
2006. Environ Sci Policy 11:371–378
Cunnane C (1988) Methods and merits of regional flood frequency analysis. J Hydrol 100(1 –3):269–290
Cutter SL, Barnes L, Berry M, Burton C, Evans E, Tate E, Webb J (2008) A place-based model for understanding
community resilience to natural disasters. Glob Environ Chang 18(4):598–606
D’Onofrio EE, Fiore MME, Romero SI (1999) Return periods of extreme water levels estimated for some
vulnerable areas of Buenos Aires. Contiental Shelf Res 18(13):1681–1693
Da Paz AR, Collischonn W , Tucci CEM, Padovani CR (2011) Large-scale modelling of channel flow and
floodplain inundation dynamics and its application to the Pantanal (Brazil). Hydrol Process 25:1498–15
 16
DCLG (2010) Planning policy statement 25: development and flood risk (revised 2010). Department for
Communities and Local Government (DCLG), London
De Kok JL, Grossmann M (2010) Large-scale assessment of flood risk and the effects of mitigation measures
along the Elbe River. Nat Hazards 52:143–166. doi:10.1007/s11069-009-9363-6
De Moel H, Aerts JCJH (2008) Integration of flood management and spatial planning in European research. In:
Timmerman JG, Pahl-Wostl C, Moltgen J (eds) Adaptiveness of IWRM —analysing European IWRM
research (EU Report series, chapter 9). IW A Publishing, London, pp 129–139
De Moel H, Aerts JCJH (2011) Effect of uncertainty in land use, damage models and inundation depth on flood
damage estimates. Nat Hazards 58(1):407–425
De Moel H, van Alphen J, Aerts JCJH (2009) Flood maps in Europe —methods, availability and use. Nat
Hazards Earth Syst Sci 9:289–301
De Moel H, Aerts JCJH, Koomen E (2011) Development of flood exposure in the Netherlands during the 20th
and 21st century. Glob Environ Chang 21(2):620–627. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.12.005
De Moel H, Asselman NEM, Aerts JCJH (2012) Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis of coastal flood damage
estimates in the west of the Netherlands. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 12:1045 –1058
De Moel H, van Vliet M, Aerts JCJH (2014a) Evaluating the effect of flood damage-reducing measures: a case
study of the unembanked area of Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Reg Environ Chang 14(3):895 –908. doi:10.
1007/s10113-013-0420-z
884 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 21]]
De Moel H, Bouwer LM, Aerts JCJH (2014b) Uncertainty and sensitivity of flood risk calculations for a dike
ring in the south of the Netherlands. Sci Total Environ 473 –474(1):224–234
Dilley M, Chen RS, Deichmann U, Lerner-Lam A, Arnold M, Agwe J, Buys P , Kjekstad O, Lyon B, Y etman G
(2005) Natural disaster hotspots—a global risk analysis. The World Bank, Washington
Dueñas-Osorio L, Craig L, Goodno B, Bostrom A (2007) Interdependent response of networked systems. J
Infrastruct Syst 13(3):185–194
Ehrlich D, Zeug G (2010) Quantifying the built-up stock from VHR optical satellite imagery for assessing
disaster risk. Geocarto Int 25(3)
Elmer F, Thieken AH, Pech I, Kreibich H (2010) Influence of flood frequency on residential building losses. Nat
Hazards Earth Syst Sci 10:2145–2159
Elmer F, Hoymann J, Duethmann D, V orogushyn S, Kreibich H (2012) Drivers of flood risk change in residential
areas. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 12(5):1641–1657
Environment Agency (2009) Investing for the future: flood and coastal risk management in England.
Environmental Agency (EA), Bristol
Ernst J, Dewals BJ, Detrembleur S, Archambeau P , Erpicum S, Pirotton M (2010) Micro-scale flood risk analysis
based on detailed 2D hydraulic modelling and high resolution geographic data. Nat Hazards 55:1818 –209
Evans EP , Johnson PJ, Green CH, V arsa E (2000) Risk assessment and programme prioritisation: the Hungary
flood study. Proceedings of the 35th Annual MAFF Conference of River and Coastal Engineers, London
Evans EP , Ashley R, Hall JW , Penning-Rowsell EC, Saul A, Sayers PB, Thorne CR, Watkinson A (2004)
Foresight flood and coastal defence project: scientific summary: volume 1, future risks and their drivers.
Office of Science and Technology, London
Falter D, Schröter K, Nguyen D, V orogushyn S, Kreibich H, Hundecha Y , Apel H, Merz B (2015a) Spatially
coherent flood risk assessment based on long-term continuous simulation with a coupled model chain. J
Hydrol. doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2015.02.021
Falter D, Dung VN, V orogushyn S, Schröter K, Hundecha Y , Kreibich H, Apel H, Theisselmann F, Merz B
(2015b) Continuous, large-scale simulation model for flood risk assessments: proof-of-concept. J Flood Risk
Manag. doi:10.1111/jfr3.12105
Feyen L, Dankers R, Bódis K, Salamon P , Barredo JI (2012) Fluvial flood risk in Europe in present and future
climates. Clim Chang 112:47–62
Foudi S, Osés-Eraso N, Tamayo I (2015) Integrated spatial flood risk assessment: the case of Zaragoza. Land Use
Policy 42:278–292. doi:10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.080.002
Freire S, Santos T, Navarro A, Soares F, Dinis J, Afonso N, Fonseca A, Tenedorio JA (2010)
Extraction of buildings from QuickBird imagery for municipal planning purposes: quality assess-
ment considering existing mapping standards. In: 30 EARsel symposium —remote sensing for
science, education and culture, Paris
Freni G, La Loggia G, Notaro V (2010) Uncertainty in urban flood damage assessment due to urban drainage
modelling and depth-damage curve estimation. Water Sci Technol 61:2979–2993. doi:10.2166/wst.2010.177
Gall M, Borden KA, Emrich CT, Cutter SL (2011) The unsustainable trend of natural hazard losses in the United
States. Sustainability 3:2157–2181
Ganoulis J (2003) Risk-based floodplain management: a case study from Greece. Intl J River Basin Manag 1(1):
41–47
Gaslikova L, Schwerzmann A, Raible CC, Stocker TF (2011) Future storm surge impacts on insurable losses for
the North Sea region. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 11:1205 –1216
Gerl TM, Bochow M, Kreibich H (2014) Flood damage modeling on the basis of urban structure mapping using
high-resolution remote sensing data. Water 6(8):2367–2393
Green C (2003) Handbook of water economics: principals and practice. Wiley, Chichester
Grunthal G, Thieken AH, Schwarz J, Radtke KS, Smolka A, Merz B (2006) Comparative risk assessment for the
city of Cologne—storms, floods, earthquakes. Nat Hazards 38:21–44
Hall JW , Dawson RJ, Sayers PB, Rosu C, Chatterton JB, Deakin R (2003) A methodology for national-scale
flood risk assessment. Water Marit Eng 156:235–247
Hall JW , Sayers PB, Dawson RJ (2005) National-scale assessment of current and future flood risk in England and
Wales. Nat Hazards 36:147–164
Hallegatte S (2007) The use of synthetic hurricane tracks in risk analysis and climate change damage assessment.
JA p p lM e t e o r o lC l i m a t o l4 6 : 1 9 5 6–1966
Hallegatte S (2008) An adaptive regional input-output model and its application to the assessment of the
economic cost of Katrina. Risk Anal 28:779 –799. doi:10.1111/j.1539-6924.2008.01046.x
H
allegatte S, Green C, Nicholls RJ, Corfee-Morlot J (2013) Future flood losses in major coastal cities. Nat Clim
Chang 3:802–806
Harris I, Jones PD, Osborn TJ, Lister DH (2013) Updated high-resolution grids of monthly climatic observa-
tions—the CRU TS3.10 dataset. Int J Climatol. doi: 10.1002/joc.3711
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 885

[[PAGE 22]]
Hirabayashi Y , Roobavannan M, Sujan K, Lisako K, Dai Y , Satoshi W , Hyungjun K, Shinjiro K (2013) Global
flood risk under climate change. Nat Clim Chang 3:816 –821. doi:10.1038/nclimate1911
Hochrainer S, Linnerooth-Bayer J, Mechler R (2010) The European Union Solidarity Fund. Mitig Adapt Strateg
Glob Chang 15:797–810
Hooijer A, Klijn F, Pedroli GBM, V an Os AG (2004) Towards sustainable flood risk management in the Rhine
and Meuse river basins: synopsis of the findings of Irma-sponge. River Res Appl 20:343–357. doi:10.1002/
rra.781
Hosking JRM, Wallis JR (1997) Regional frequency analysis. An approach based on L-Moments. Cambridge
University Press, p 224
Huizinga HJ (2007) Flood damage functions for EU member states. Technical report, HKV Consultants
ICPR (2001) Atlas of flood danger and potential damage due to extreme floods of the Rhine. International
Commission for the Protection of the Rhine (ICPR), Koblenz
IPCC (2012) Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change adaptation. A special
report of working groups I and II of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge
Jongman B, Ward PJ, Aerts JCJH (2012a) Global exposure to river and coastal flooding—long term trends and
changes. Glob Environ Chang 22:823–835. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.07.004
Jongman B, Kreibich H, Apel H, Barredo JI, Bates PD, Feyen L, Gericke A, Neal J, Aerts JCJH, Ward PJ
(2012b) Comparative flood damage model assessment: towards a European approach. Nat Hazards Earth
Syst Sci 12:3733–3752
Jongman B, Hochrainer-Stigler S, Feyen L, Aerts JCJH, Mechler R, Botzen WJW , Bouwer LM, Pflug G, Rojas
R, Ward PJ (2014) Increasing stress on disaster risk finance due to large floods. Nat Clim Chang 4:264–268.
doi:10.1038/NCLIMA TE2124
Jonkman SN, Bockarjova M, Kok M, Bernardini P (2008) Integrated hydrodynamic and economic modelling of
flood damage in the Netherlands. Ecol Econ 66:77– 90. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2007.12.022
Keef C, Tawn JA, Lamb R (2013) Estimating the probability of widespread flood events. Environmetrics 24:13–21
Kind J D2011] Maatschappelijke kosten-batenanalyse Waterveiligheid 21e eeuw. 1204144-006-ZWS-0012.
Deltares, Delft, in Dutch
Klijn F, Kreibich H, De Moel H, Penning-Rowsell E (2015) Adaptive flood risk management planning based on
a comprehensive flood risk conceptualisation. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, this
issue
Kok M, Huizinga HJ, Vrouwenvelder ACWM, Barendregt A (2005) Standaardmethode2004 - schade en
slachtoffers als gevolg van overstromingen. DWW-2005-005, RWS Dienst Weg- en Waterbouwkunde.
(in Dutch)
Koks EE, de Moel H, Aerts JCJH, Bouwer LM (2014a) Effect of spatial adaptation measures on flood risk: study
of coastal floods in Belgium. Reg Environ Chang 14(1):413 –425
Koks EE, Bockarjova M, De Moel H, Aerts JCJH (2014b) Integrated direct and indirect flood risk modeling:
development and sensitivity analysis. Risk Anal. doi:10.1111/risa.12300
Kreibich H, Thieken AH (2008). Assessment of damage caused by high groundwater inundation. Water Resour
Res 44(9). doi:10.1029/2007WR006621
Kreibich H, Thieken AH (2009) Coping with floods in the city of Dresden, Germany. Nat Hazards 51(3):423 –
436
Kreibich H, Piroth K, Seifert I, Maiwald H, Kunert U, Schwarz J, Merz B, Thieken AH (2009) Is flow velocity a
significant parameter in flood damage modelling? Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci (NHESS) 9(5):1679 –1692
Kreibich H, Seifert I, Merz B, Thieken AH (2010) Development of flemocs—a new model for the estimation of
flood losses in the commercial sector. Hydrol Sci J-J des Sci Hydrol 55:1302–1314. doi:10.1080/02626667.
2010.529815
Kreibich H, Meyer S, Diekkrüger B (2011a) Weiterentwicklung von FLEMOps zur Modellierung von
Grundhochwasserschäden und Wohngebäuden. Hydrol Wasserbewirtsch 55(6):300–309
Kreibich H, Seifert I, Thieken AH, Lindquist E, Wagner K, Merz B (2011b) Recent changes in flood
preparedness of private households and businesses in Germany. Reg Environ Chang 11(1):59–71
Kreibich H, V an den Bergh JCJM, Bouwer LM, Bubeck P , Ciavola P , Green C, Hallegatte S, Logar I, Meyer V ,
Schwarze R, Thieken AH (2014) Costing natural hazards. Nat Clim Chang 4:303 –306
Kron W D2002] K
eynote lecture: flood risk = hazard × exposure × vulnerability. In: Wu B, Wang Z, Wang G,
Huang G, Fang H, Huang J Deds] Flood defence ‘2002. Science Press, New Y ork, pp 82 –97, Ltd. http://
www.cws.net.cn/cwsnet/meeting-fanghong/v10108.pdf
Kundzewicz ZW , Pińskwar I, Brakenridge GR (2013) Large floods in Europe, 1985–2009. Hydrol Sci J 58:1–7
Lamb R, Keef C, Tawn J, Laeger S, Meadowcroft I, Surendran S, Dunning P , Batstone C (2010) A
new method to assess the risk of local and widespread flood on rivers and coasts. J Flood Risk
Manag 3(4):323– 336
886 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 23]]
Lammersen R, Engel H, V an de Langemheen W , Buiteveld H (2002) Impact of river training and retention
measures on flood peaks along the Rhine. J Hydrol 267:115 –124
Lasage R, V eldkamp TIE, De Moel H, V an TC, Phi HL, V ellinga P , Aerts JCJH (2014) Assessment of the
effectiveness of flood adaptation strategies for HCMC. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 14:1441 –1457
Li J, Crawford-Brown D, Syddall M, Guan D (2013) Modeling imbalanced economic recovery following a
natural disaster using input-output analysis. Risk Anal. doi:10.1111/risa.12040
Lumbruso D (2007) Review report of operational flood management methods and models. FLOODsite Project
Report: Integrated Flood Risk Analysis and Management Methodologies. EU Sixth Framework Programme
Merz B, Thieken AH (2004) Flood risk analysis: concepts and challenges. Österreichische Wasser-und
Abfallwirtschaft 56(3–4):27–34
Merz B, Thieken AH (2005) Separating natural and epistemic uncertainty in flood frequency analysis. J Hydrol
309(1–4):114–132
Merz B, Thieken AH (2009) Flood risk curves and uncertainty bounds. Nat Hazards 51:437 –458. doi:10.1007/
s11069-009-9452-6
Merz B, Kreibich H, Thieken AH, Schmidtke R (2004) Estimation uncertainty of direct monetary flood damage
to buildings. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 4:153 –163. doi:10.5194/nhess-4-153-2004
Merz B, Thieken AH, Gocht M (2007) Flood risk mapping at the local scale: concepts and challenges. In: Begum
S, Stive M, Hall J (eds) Advances in natural and technological hazards research. Springer, Dordrecht, pp
231–251
Merz B, Elmer F, Thieken AH (2009) Significance of‘high probability/low damage’ versus ‘low probability/high
damage’ flood events. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 9:1033 –1046. doi:10.5194/nhess-9-1033-2009
Merz B, Kreibich H, Schwarze R, Thieken A (2010a) Review article ‘assessment of economic flood damage’.
Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 10:1697 –1724. doi:10.5194/nhess-10-1697-2010
Merz B, Hall J, Disse M, Schumann A (2010b) Fluvial flood risk management in a changing world. Nat Hazards
Earth Syst Sci 10:509–527
Merz B, V orogushyn S, Uhlemann S, Delgado J, Hundecha Y (2012) HESS Opinions‘More efforts and scientific
rigour are needed to attribute trends in flood time series ’. Hydrol Earth Syst Sci 16(5):1379 –1387
Merz B, Kreibich H, Lall U (2013) Multi-variate flood damage assessment: a tree-based data-mining approach.
Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 13(1):53 –64
Messner F, Meyer V (2006) Flood damage, vulnerability and risk perception —challenges for flood damage
research. In: Schanze J, Zeman E, Marsalek J (eds) Flood risk management: hazards, vulnerability and
mitigation measures. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 149–169
Messner F, Pennning Rowsell E, Green C, Meyer V , Tunstall S, V an der V een A (2007) Evaluating flood
damages: guidance and recommendations on principles and practices. T09-06-01, FLOODsite
Meyer V , Scheuer S, Haase D (2009) A multicriteria approach for flood risk mapping exemplified at the Mulde
River, Germany. Nat Hazards 48:17–39. doi:10.1007/s11069-008-9244-4
Meyer V , Becker N, Markantonis V , Schwarze R, V an den Bergh JCJM, Bouwer LM, Bubeck P , Ciavola P ,
Genovese E, Green C, Hallegatte S, Kreibich H, Lequeux Q, Logar I, Papyrakis E, Pfurtscheller C, Poussin
J, Przyluski V , Thieken AH, Viavattene C (2013) Review article: assessing the costs of natural hazards —
state of the art and knowledge gaps. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 13:1351 –1373
Michel-Kerjan E, Kunreuther H (2011) Redesigning flood insurance. Science 333:408–409
Middelmann-Fernandes MH (2010) Flood damage estimation beyond stage-damage functions: an Australian
ex
ample. J Flood Risk Manag 3(1):88 –96. doi:10.1111/j.1753-318X.2009.01058x
Munich Re (2013) Natural catastrophes in the first half year of 2013. Munich Re NatCatSER VICE
Neal J, Schumann G, Bates P (2012) A subgrid channel model for simulating river hydraulics and floodplain
inundation over large and data sparse areas. Water Resour Res 48, W11506
Neuhold C, Nachtnebel HP (2008) Flood risk assessment in an Austrian municipality comprising the evaluation
of effectiveness and efficiency of flood mitigation measures. In: Flood risk management-research and
practise. Taylor & Francis Group, London, p 135
Neumayer E, Barthel F (2011) Normalizing economic loss from natural disasters: a global analysis. Glob Environ
Chang 21(1):13–24
Nicholas J, Holt GD, Proverbs D (2001) Towards standardizing the assessment of flood damaged properties in
the UK. Struct Surv 19:163 –172
Nicholls RJ, Hanson S, Herweijer C, Patmore N, Hallegatte S, Corfee-Morlot J, Chateau J, Muir-Wood R (2008)
Ranking port cities with high exposure and vulnerability to climate extremes —exposure estimates. ENV/
WKP(2007)1, OECD Publishing, Paris
Okuyama Y , Santos JR (2014) Disaster impact and input-output analysis. Econ Syst Res 26(1):1 –12. doi:10.
1080/09535314.2013.871505
Olsen JR, Beling P A, Lambert JH, Haimes YY (1998) Input-output economic evaluation of system of levees. J
Water Res 124(5):237–245
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 887

[[PAGE 24]]
Pappenberger E, Dutra E, Wetterhall F, Cloke HL (2012) Deriving global flood hazard maps of fluvial floods
through a physical model cascade. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 16:4143 –4156
Patterson SA, Apostolakis GE (2007) Identification of critical locations across multiple infrastructures for
terrorist actions. Reliab Eng Syst Saf 92(9):1183–1203
Peduzzi P , Chatenoux B, Dao H, De Bono A, Herold C, Kossin J, Mouton F, Nordbeck O (2012) Global trends in
tropical cyclone risk. Nat Clim Chang 2:289 –294. doi:10.1038/NCLIMA TE1410
Penning-Rowsell EC (2013) A ‘realist’ approach to the extent of flood risk in England and Wales. In: Klijn F,
Schweckendiek T (eds) Comprehensive flood risk management: research for policy and practice. Taylor and
Francis, London, p 450
Penning-Rowsell EC (2015) A realistic assessment of fluvial and coastal flood risk in England and Wales. Trans
Inst Br Geogr 40(1):44–61
Penning-Rowsell E, Viavattene C, Pardoe J, Chatterton J, Parker D, Morris J (2010) The benefits of flood and
coastal risk management: A handbook of assessment techniques. Middlesex University Press, London
Penning-Rowsell EC, Priest S, Parker DJ, Morris J, Tunstall S, Viavattene C, Owen D (2013) Flood and coastal
erosion risk management: a manual for economic appraisal. Routledge, London
Petrow T, Thieken AH, Kreibich H, Bahlburg CH, Merz B (2006) Improvements on flood alleviation in
Germany: lessons learned from the Elbe flood in August 2002. Environ Manag 38:717 –732. doi:10.1007/
s00267-005-6291-4
Poussin JK, Bubeck P , Aerts JCJH, Ward PJ (2012) Potential of semi-structural and non-structural adaptation
strategies to reduce future flood risk: case study for the Meuse. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 12:3455 –3471.
doi:10.5194/nhess-12-3455-2012
Rodda HJE (2001) The development of a stochastic rainfall model for UK flood modelling. In: P . Krahe, D.
Herpetz, (eds.) Generation of hydrometeorological reference conditions for the assessment of flood hazard in
large river basins. CHR-Report No. I-20, Koblenz
Rodda HJE (2005) The development and application of a flood risk model for the Czech Republic. Nat Hazards
36:207–220
Rojas R, Feyen L, Bianchi A, Dosio A (2012) Assessment of future flood hazard in Europe using a large
ensemble of bias-corrected regional climate simulations. J Geophys Res 117, D17109. doi: 10.1029/
2012JD017461
Rojas R, Feyen L, Watkiss P (2013) Climate change and river floods in the European Union: socio-economic
consequences and the costs and benefits of adaptation. Glob Environ Chang 23(6):1737–1751. doi:10.1016/
j.gloenvcha.2013.08.006
Rose A, Liao SY (2005) Modeling regional economic resilience to disasters: a computable general equilibrium
analysis of water service disruptions. J Reg Sci 45:75 –112
RWS-DWW (2005) Flood risks and safety in the Netherlands (Floris). DWW-2006-014, Ministerie van V erkeer
en Waterstaat. http://www.projectvnk.nl/html/
Saint-Geours N, Grelot F, Bailly J-S, Lavergne C (2013) Ranking sources of uncertainty in flood damage
modelling: a case study on the cost-benefit analysis of a flood mitigation project in the Orb Delta, France. J
Flood Risk Manag. doi:10.1111/jfr3.12068
Scawthorn C, Flores P , Blais N, Seligson H, Tate E, Chang S, Mifflin E, Thomas W , Murphy J, Jones C,
Lawrence M (2006) HAZUS-MH flood loss estimation methodology. II: damage and loss assessment. Nat
Hazards Rev 7(2):72–81
Schröter K, Kreibich H, V ogel K, Riggelsen C, Scherbaum F, Merz B (2014) How useful are complex flood
damage models. Water Resour Res 50(4):3378–3395. doi:10.1002/2013WR014396
Schröter K, Kunz M, Elmer F, Mühr B, Merz B (2015) What made the June 2013 flood in Germany an
exceptional event? A hydro-meteorological evaluation. Hydrol Earth Syst Sci 19:309–327
Schumann G, Di Baldassarre G (2010) The direct use of radar satellites for event-specific flood risk mapping.
Remote Sens Lett 1(2):75–84
Schumann G, Di Baldassarre G, Bates PD (2009) The utility of space-borne radar to render flood inundation
maps based on multi-algorithm ensembles. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 47 8(2):2801 –2807
Seifert I, Kreibich H, Merz B, Thieken AH (2010) Application and validation of FLEMOcs —af l o o dl o s s
estimation model for the commercial sector. Hydrol Sci J - J des Sci Hydrol 55(8):1315 –1324
Seifert I, Botzen WJW , Kreibich H, Aerts JCJH (2013) Influence of flood risk characteristics on flood insurance
demand: a comparison between Germany and the Netherlands. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 13(7):1691–170
Smith DI (1994) Flood damage estimation—a
review of urban stage-damage curves and loss functions. Water SA
20:231–238
Stedinger JR, V ogel RM, Foufoula-Georgiou E (1993) Frequency analysis of extreme events. In: Maidment DA
(ed) Handbook of hydrology, chapter 18. McGraw-Hill, New York
Steenge AE, Bockarjova M (2007) Thinking about imbalances and rigidities in post-catastrophe economics: an
input-output based proposition. Econ Syst Res 19(2):205–223
888 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890

[[PAGE 25]]
Stuerck J, Poortinga A, V erburg PH (2014) Mapping ecosystem services: the supply and demand of flood
regulation services in Europe. Ecol Indic 38:198–211
Takeuchi K (2001) Increasing vulnerability to extreme floods and societal needs of hydrological forecasting.
Hydrol Sci J 46(6):869–881
Tang JCS, V ongvisessomjai S, Sahasakmontri K (1992) Estimation of flood damage cost for Bangkok. Water
Resour Manag 6:47–56
Tapia-Silva F-O, Itzerott S, Förster S, Kuhlmann B, Kreibich H (2011) Estimation of flood losses to agricultural
crops using remote sensing. Phys Chem Earth 36(7 –8):253–265
Te Linde AH, Aerts JCJH, Bakker AMR, Kwadijk JCJ (2010a) Simulating low probability peak discharges for
the Rhine basin using resampled climate modeling data. Water Resour Res 46, WR03512. doi: 10.1029/
2009WR007707
Te Linde AH, Aerts JCJH, Kwadijk JCJ (2010b) Effectiveness of flood management measures on peak
discharges in the Rhine basin under climate change. J Flood Risk Manag 3:248 –269. doi:10.1111/j.1753-
318X.2010.01076.x
Te Linde AH, Bubeck P , Dekkers JEC, De Moel H, Aerts JCJH (2011) Future flood risk estimates along the river
Rhine. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 11:459 –473. doi:10.5194/nhess-11-459-2011
Tebodin (2000) Schadecurves industrie ten gevolge van overstroming. (in Dutch)
Thieken AH, Müller M, Kreibich H, Merz B (2005) Flood damage and influencing factors: new insights from the
August 2002 flood in Germany. Water Resour Res 41(12), W12430
Thieken AH, Petrow T, Kreibich H, Merz B (2006) Insurability and mitigation of flood losses in private
households in Germany. Risk Anal 26:383–395. doi:10.1111/j.1539-6924.2006.00741
Thieken AH, Olschewski A, Kreibich H, Kobsch S, Merz B (2008) Development and evaluation of flemops—a
new flood loss estimation model for the private sector. In: Flood recovery, innovation and response I, WIT
Press, pp 315–324
Toyoda (2008) Economic impacts of Kobe earthquake: a quantitative evaluation after 13 years. Proceedings of
the 5th International ISCRAM Conference, Washington
Tsay C, Nadibaidze L, Mahnovski S, Howe D (2014) Modeling electric power outage risk from storm tide events
and climate change impacts. Appendix A to Storm hardening and resiliency collaborative report,
Consolidated Edison Company of New Y ork, Inc.
Tschoegl L, Below R, Guha-Sapir D (2006) An analytical review of selected data sets on natural disasters and
impacts. UNDP/CRED Workshop on Improving Compilation of Reliable Data on Disaster Occurrence and
Impact, Brussels
UNDP (2013) A comparative review of country-level and regional disaster loss and damage databases. United
Nations Development Program (UNDP), New Y ork
UNISDR (2007) Hyogo framework for action 2005 –2015: building the resilience of nations and
communities to disasters. United Nations Inte rnational Strategy f or Disaster Reduction
Secretariat, Geneva
UNISDR (2009) GAR2009—global assessment report on disaster risk reduction. Risk and poverty in a changing
climate. United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Secretariat, Geneva
UNISDR (2011) GAR 2011 —global assessment report on disaster risk reduction. Revealing risk, redefining
development. United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Secretariat, Geneva
UNISDR (2013) GAR 2013 —global assessment report on disaster risk reduction. From share risk to shared
value: the business case for disaster risk reduction. United Nations International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction Secretariat, Geneva
V an Alphen J, Van Beek E (2006) From flood defence to flood management—prerequisites for sustainable flood
management. In: V an Alphen J, V an Beek E, Taal M (eds) Floods, from defence to management. Taylor &
Francis Group, London, pp 11–15
V an Renssen S (2013) EU adaptation policy sputters and starts. Nat Clim Chang 3:614–615
V ogel K, Riggelsen C, Scherbaum F, Schröter K, Kreibich H, Merz B (2013) Challenges for Bayesian network
learning in a flood damage assessment application. ICOSSAR 2013, New Y ork
V orogushyn S, Merz B, Apel H (2009) Development of dike fragility curves for piping and micro-
instability breach mechanisms. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 9(4):1383 –1401. doi: 10.5194/nhess-9-
1383-2009
V orogushyn S, Merz B, Lindenschmidt KE, Apel H (2010) A new methodology for flood hazard assessment
considering dike breaches. Water Resour Res 46, W08541. doi:10.1029/2009WR008475
V orogushyn S, Merz B, Lindenschmidt KE, Kreibich H, Apel HA, Merz B (2012) Analysis of a detention basin
impact on dike failure probabilities and flood risk for a channel-dike-floodplain system along the river Elbe,
Germany. J Hydrol 436–4
37:120 –131
Ward PJ, De Moel H, Aerts JCJH (2011) How are flood risk estimates affected by the choice of return periods?
Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci 11:3181–3195. doi:10.5194/nhess-11-3181-2011
Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890 889

[[PAGE 26]]
Ward PJ, Jongman B, Sperna Weiland FC, Bouwman A, V an Beek R, Bierkens M, Ligtvoet W , Winsemius HC
(2013) Assessing flood risk at the global scale: model setup, results, and sensitivity. Environ Res Lett 8:
044019. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/4/044019
Ward PJ, Jongman B, Kummu M, Dettinger MD, Sperna Weiland FC, Winsemius HC (2014) Strong influence of
El Niño Southern Oscillation on flood risk around the world. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111(44):15659 –
15644. doi:10.1073/pnas.1409822111
Wilson M, Bates P , Alsdorf D, Forsbert B, Horritt M, Melack J, Frappart F, Famiglietti J (2007) Modeling large-
scale inundation of Amazonian seasonally flooded wetlands. Geophys Res Lett 34(15), L15404
Wilson TM, Stewart C, Sword-Daniels V , Leionard GS, Johnston DM, Cole JW , Wardman J, Wilson G, Barnard
ST (2012) V olcanic ash impacts on critical infrastructure. Phys Chem Earth Parts A/B/C 45–46:5–23. doi:10.
1016/j.pce.2011.06.006
Wind HG, Nierop TM, de Blois CJ, Kok JL (1999) Analysis of flood damages from the 1993 and 1995 Meuse
floods. Water Resour Res 35(11):3459–3465
Winkler J, Duenas-Osorio L, Stein R, Subramanian D (2011) Interface network models for complex urban
infrastructure systems. J Infrastruct Syst 17(4):138–150. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)IS.1943-555X.0000068
Winsemius HC, V an Beek R, Jongman B, Ward PJ, Bouwman A (2013) A framework for global river flood risk
assessments. Hydrol Earth Syst Sci 17:1871–1892. doi:10.5194/hess-17-1871-2013
Wünsch A, Hermann U, Kreibich H, Thieken AH (2009) The role of disaggregation of asset values in flood loss
estimation: a comparison of different modeling approaches at the Mulde River, Germany. Environ Manag
44(3):524–541
Xu XP , Booij MJ, Mynett AE (2007) Propagation of discharge uncertainty in a flood damage model for the
Meuse river. In: Begum S et al (eds) Flood risk management in Europe. pp 293 –310
Y amamura E (2010) Effects of interactions among social capital, income and learning from experiences of natural
disasters: a case study from Japan. Reg Stud 44(8):1019 –1032. doi:10.1080/00343400903365144
Zhai G, Fukuzono T, Ikeda S (2005) Modeling flood damage: case of Tokai Flood 2000. J Am Water Resour As
41:77–92
890 Mitig Adapt Strateg Glob Change (2015) 20:865–890