[[PAGE 1]]
Equity and the Environment
Is inequality bad for the environment?
James K. Boyce
Article information:
To cite this document: James K. Boyce. "Is inequality bad for the environment?" In
Equity and the Environment. Published online: 12 Mar 2015; 267-288.
Permanent link to this document:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0196-1152(07)15008-0
Downloaded on: 01 February 2016, At: 20:40 (PT)
References: this document contains references to 48 other documents.
To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 243 times since NaN*
Users who downloaded this article also downloaded:
William R. Freudenburg, Robert C. Wilkinson, (2007),"Equity and the environment: a
pressing need and a new step forward", Research in Social Problems and Public Policy,
Vol. 15 pp. 1-18
Andrew K. Shenton, Naomi V. Hay-Gibson, (2011),"Modelling the information behaviour
of children and young people: More inspiration from beyond LIS", Aslib Proceedings,
Vol. 63 Iss 5 pp. 499-516 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00012531111164987
Alefiyah Oakford, Peter Williams, (2011),"The use and value of local information
systems: A case study of the Milton Keynes intelligence (MKi) Observatory", Aslib
Proceedings, Vol. 63 Iss 5 pp. 533-548 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00012531111165003
Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by
emerald-srm:149425 []
For Authors
If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please
use our Emerald for Authors service information about how to choose which
publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit
www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.
About Emerald www.emeraldinsight.com
Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society.
The company manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and
book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online products and
additional customer resources and services.
Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner
of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the
LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 2]]
*Related content and download information correct at
time of download.
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 3]]
IS INEQUALITY BAD
FOR THE ENVIRONMENT?
James K. Boyce
ABSTRACT
By respecting nature’s limits and investing in nature’s wealth, we can
protect and enhance the environment’s ability to sustain human well-
being. But how humans interact with nature is intimately tied to how we
interact with each other. Those who are relatively powerful and wealthy
typically gain disproportionate beneﬁts from the economic activities that
degrade the environment, while those who are relatively powerless and
poor typically bear disproportionate costs. All else equal, wider political
and economic inequalities tend to result in higher levels of environmental
harm. For this reason, efforts to safeguard the natural environment must
go hand-in-hand with efforts to achieve more equitable distributions of
power and wealth in human societies. Globalization – the growing
integration of markets and governance worldwide – today poses new
challenges and new opportunities for both of these goals.
PROLOGUE
In the mid-1970s, I lived in a rural village in northwestern Bangladesh, in
one of the poorest parts of a poor country. Bangladesh had just had a
Equity and the Environment
Research in Social Problems and Public Policy, Volume 15, 267–288
Copyright r 2008 by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved
ISSN: 0196-1152/doi:10.1016/S0196-1152(07)15008-0
267
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 4]]
famine in which some 200,000 people perished. The famine was caused not
by an absolute shortage of rice, the staple food of the population, but rather
by a combination of grain hoarding by merchants and government
ineptitude and corruption. The village where I lived was located in the
most famine-stricken district of the country.
1
To the eyes of a young American, a striking feature of Bangladeshi village
life – apart from the poverty of the people – was the virtual absence of
negative environmental impacts from human activities. The villagers farmed
rice and jute much as their ancestors had for centuries. Agrochemicals had
only begun to appear on the scene, and village farmers used them sparingly,
if at all. Across the country, Bangladeshi farmers grew some 10,000 different
varieties of rice adapted to microclimatic variations in rainfall, ﬂood
depths, temperature, and soil type, making the country a storehouse
for genetic diversity of humankind’s most important food crop. Hundreds
of ﬁsh species – more than in all Europe – lived in the country’s rivers,
ponds, and rice paddies, supplying most of the animal protein in the
Bangladeshi diet.
There was no trash-collection service in the village, and no need for one,
for the villagers produced little, if any, solid waste. Practically everything
they consumed – food, cooking fuel, housing materials, herbal medicines –
was harvested from their local environment. Crop residues and manures
were returned to the earth or burned as fuel. Metal items were carefully
recycled, tin containers fashioned into building supplies. Few villagers had
ever seen plastic: local children amused themselves by repeatedly dropping a
red plastic cup I had brought with me to the village, showing their friends
that it did not break. Despite their poverty – in some ways, because of it –
they did not harm the environment, on which their livelihoods depended.
One time, while visiting Dhaka, Bangladesh’s capital city, I stumbled
upon what may have been the country’s ﬁrst environmental campaign. The
government – a one-party state headed by a once-popular politician who
recently had declared himself ‘‘president for life’’ – had just announced a
campaign of ‘‘urban beautiﬁcation.’’ Dhaka’s sprawling slums, which had
multiplied during the famine as starving people from the countryside
migrated to the city in search of work or relief, were razed to the ground.
Their inhabitants were brusquely herded onto trucks that deposited them
outside town, far from the eyes and consciousness of the city’s middle- and
upper-class residents.
The human costs of this policy were vividly brought home to me by a
scene I witnessed in front of Dhaka’s general post ofﬁce. An emaciated
woman and her baby were sitting on a dirty cloth spread on the sidewalk.
JAMES K. BOYCE268
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 5]]
Passers-by occasionally dropped a coin. When I emerged from the post
ofﬁce a few minutes later, the woman was gone, perhaps trailing after a well-
to-do stranger to plead for alms. Then a police truck drove by, its bed full of
destitute people being relocated. Spying the baby, the truck stopped and a
policeman dismounted. He unceremoniously tossed her into the back of the
truck, which lumbered off in search of more human cargo. I do not know
whether they picked up the mother.
The irony was inescapable and terrible: In a land where they lived lightly
on the earth, the poor themselves were regarded as pollution.
WHAT IS ENVIRONMENTAL HARM?
What does it mean to say something is ‘‘bad for the environment’’ or ‘‘good
for the environment’’? These value judgments rest, implicitly or explicitly,
on ethical criteria by which we distinguish better from worse.
A criterion that has gained many adherents in the past two decades is
‘‘sustainable development.’’ This was deﬁned by the World Commission
on Environment and Development in its 1987 manifesto, Our Common
Future (also known as the Brundtland Report, after commission chair
Gro Brundtland), as development that ‘‘meets the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs’’ ( World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987 ).
By this criterion, ‘‘environmental harm’’ means actions that compromise the
ability of future generations to meet their needs. Conversely, ‘‘environ-
mental improvements’’ would refer to actions that enhance the ability of
future generations to meet their needs.
The Brundtland criterion has the merits of afﬁrming the importance of
human well-being and our responsibility to future generations. But as Nobel
Prize-winning economist Amartya Sen (2004) has remarked, ‘‘Seeing people
in terms of only their needs may give us a rather meagre view of humanity.’’
Sen suggests that the ethical basis for value judgments about the
environment can be deepened by embracing a broader range of human
values. For example, people may believe that we have a responsibility to
safeguard the existence of other species (as an illustration, Sen mentions the
spotted owl of the Paciﬁc northwest) regardless of whether the species in
question serves any practical human needs. In other words, people may
value nature for intrinsic as well as instrumental reasons. If so, environ-
mental quality can be seen as an end in itself, and not merely a means to
other ends.
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 269
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 6]]
Sen also observes that people hold multiple values, and that these
cannot be readily reduced to a summary measure such as overall fulﬁllment
of human needs. For example, we may believe that future generations have
the right to breathe clean air, and that infringement of this right cannot be
adequately compensated by improvements in other dimensions of well-
being. Not everything of value can be calibrated on a single scale.
This broader ethical framework – in which ‘‘we think of human beings as
agents, rather than merely as patients,’’ in Sen’s words – implies a central
role for citizenship in addressing environmental challenges. Freedom to
make value judgments about environmental change, and rights to a clean
and safe environment, are themselves important ethical objectives. This is
not only a matter of moral vision, but also of practical politics. The extent to
which people are able to act as citizens depends on how power is structured
and distributed in society.
In this chapter, I will use the term ‘‘environmental harm’’ to mean
impacts on the natural environment that reduce human well-being, with the
latter understood to extend beyond needs to the wider canvas of values and
rights. To say that actions are bad (or good) for the environment is to say
that they are bad (or good) for humankind.
This ethical stance makes no pretense of impartiality: it is unabashedly
human-centered. I do not regard Homo sapiens as just another species,
whose well-being is of no greater consequence than that of any other. In
many cases, what is good for other species is good for humans, too. But not
always. Sanitation and clean water-supply systems, for instance, improve
human well-being by killing bacteria and other pathogens. I regard this as a
good thing, an environmental improvement. The eradication of smallpox –
the deliberate extinction of a virus species – counts as a good thing, too.
This stance does not imply a willful disregard for nature, nor indifference to
the fates of other species. On the contrary, an environmental ethics
grounded in human well-being recognizes that we are a part of nature, not
apart from it.
THREE QUESTIONS
Whenever we analyze economic activities that generate environmental harm,
we can pose three very basic questions:
/C15Who beneﬁts from the economic activities that cause the harm? If no one
beneﬁts – or at least thinks they do – the activities would not occur.
JAMES K. BOYCE270
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 7]]
/C15Who suffers environmental harm ? If no one is hurt by these activities, they
are not a problem – at least, not in terms of human well-being.
/C15Why is the ﬁrst group able to impose environmental harm on the second?
That is, what allows some people to beneﬁt at the expense of others?
The last of these questions is crucial to understanding the reasons for
environmental harm. There are three possible answers to it.
One possibility is that those who are harmed belong to future generations,
who are not here to defend themselves. In this case, the only remedy is to
cultivate an ethic of inter-generational responsibility, one founded on a
moral commitment to safeguard the well-being of our children and
generations to come.
The second possibility is that those who are harmed lack information.
They may know that their children are falling ill, for example, but not know
what environmental circumstances are making them sick or who is
responsible for them. In this case, the solution lies in greater access to
information: environmental education in general and right-to-know laws in
particular. In the United States, for example, the Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986, passed in the wake of the chemical
plant disaster in Bhopal, India, created the Toxics Release Inventory, which
makes information on releases of toxic chemicals by industrial facilities
available to the public.
The ﬁnal possibility is that those who are harmed are alive today and well
aware of the costs imposed on them, but lack the power to prevail in making
social decisions about the environment. In this case, the solution lies in
redistributing power, so that those who suffer environmental harm are
better able to defend themselves – and the environment – from others who
beneﬁt from activities that cause the problem.
PURCHASING POWER AND POLITICAL POWER
Human beings are socially differentiated in terms of wealth and inﬂuence.
Differences in wealth translate into differences in purchasing power .
Differences in inﬂuence translate into differences in political power.
In this respect humans are different from other species. Consider, for
example, pondweed, a plant species sometimes used by ecologists to
illustrate the perils of exponential growth (see, for example, Brown, 1978 ).
Assume that the weed doubles in volume every day, and that in 30 days it
will ﬁll the pond completely, making further growth impossible and perhaps
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 271
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 8]]
overwhelming ecological balances vital to the continued existence of the
pondweed itself. When, the ecologist asks, is the pond half full? The answer,
of course, is the 29th day. This parable is invoked to depict human pressure
on the carrying capacity of planet Earth: metaphorically speaking, we are
nearing the end of the month.
Each pondweed organism is pretty much like any other. But humans
differ greatly from one another, both in their impacts on the environment
and in their ability to shield themselves from these impacts. The pondweed
analogy deﬂects attention from these differences, and from how they affect
our interactions with nature.
To understand how inequalities among humans contribute to environ-
mental harm, we need to look more closely at the two types of power:
purchasing power and political power.
Purchasing Power
In a market economy, people vote on what to produce in proportion to
the money they spend. Economists call this ‘‘effective demand.’’ This
differs from simple desire or need. A person can be hungry, and in that
sense have demand for food, but she does not have effective demand – the
ability to vote in the marketplace – unless hunger in her stomach is backed
up by money in her pocket. The distribution of purchasing power
determines how much of society’s resources will be devoted to producing
rice and beans, and how much to producing champagne and luxury
automobiles.
Purchasing power plays a central role in describing what happens in
markets. In cost–beneﬁt analysis, it also plays a central role in prescribing
what should happen if and when the government intervenes to correct
‘‘market failures’’ that arise in cases of public goods, like highways,
schools, and national defense, and in cases of externalities, like pollution,
that affect people who are not party to the market exchange between
buyer and seller.
When the government promulgates regulations to curtail pollution, for
example, it must confront the practical question: how much pollution is too
much? It would be nice to live in a world with no pollution whatsoever, but,
as economists are quick to point out, cutting pollution has costs as well as
beneﬁts. People need and want to eat, wear clothes, use medicines, move
about, and so on, and producing these goods and services often produces
some pollution, too. Faced with the choice between more goods and services
JAMES K. BOYCE272
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 9]]
and less pollution, and informed by the principle of diminishing returns
(the more we have of anything, the less each additional increment is worth),
the economist tells the government to aim for the ‘‘optimal level of
pollution,’’ deﬁned as the point at which society’s beneﬁt from additional
pollution reduction equals its cost in terms of foregone consumption of
other goods and services.
The phrase ‘‘optimal level of pollution’’ rankles many environmentalists,
but it is hard to argue with the logical proposition that the costs and
beneﬁts of any course of action ought to be weighed against each other.
The problem is how to measure all the relevant costs and beneﬁts. The
economist has a toolkit for this purpose: cost–beneﬁt analysis. It translates
all costs and beneﬁts into a single unit of measurement, money. Economists
have devised ingenious ways to translate non-market values – such as the
value of cleaner air or the existence of the spotted owl – into monetary terms.
Contingent valuation surveys, for example, are used to ask people how much
they would be willing to spend for environmental quality – say, to protect
an endangered species. Hedonic regression analysis, another popular
technique, uses actual market data to infer implicit prices; for example,
by analyzing how housing prices vary with distance from an airport
(controlling for other variables like the size of the house), in order to measure
the cost of noise pollution.
The foundation for the valuation techniques of cost–beneﬁt analysis
is willingness to pay. The costs of environmental harms are measured by
how much people are willing to pay to avoid them. This is how demand
for goods and services is measured in the marketplace, so there is a
certain consistency in using the same criterion to measure demand for
environmental quality, and to use the results in making public policy.
The willingness-to-pay criterion for valuation means, however, that the
needs and desires of some people count more than the needs and desires of
others – not necessarily because their desire for clean air or water is
any stronger, but because they wield more purchasing power to back up
their preferences.
Behind differences in willingness to pay lie differences in ability to pay. If
my willingness to pay for gold mined near your community is high, and your
community’s ability (and hence willingness) to pay to protect its air and
water from pollution by mining operations is low, then by the logic of the
cost–beneﬁt analyst, I should get the gold and you should get the pollution.
In this way, differences in purchasing power can affect not only decisions
made by private parties in response to market signals, but also public-policy
decisions made by governments.
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 273
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 10]]
Political Power
In practice, real-world political systems do not faithfully adhere to the
prescriptions of cost–beneﬁt analysts. Individuals, groups, and classes differ
from each other not only in their purchasing power but also in their political
power. The latter includes differences in their ability to inﬂuence social
decisions on environmental policies. As a result, some costs and beneﬁts
may count more than others.
Political power takes various forms:
/C15decision power to prevail in contests to determine what decision makers,
both public and private, will or will not do;
/C15agenda power to keep questions off (or on) the table of the decision
makers;
/C15value power to shape others’ preferences to coincide with one’s own; and
/C15event power to alter the circumstances that others face – for example, by
blowing smoke into the atmosphere – thus presenting them with a fait
accompli.
Each of these forms of power can lead to decisions that diverge from the
optimum prescribed by cost–beneﬁt analysis (for discussion, see Bartlett,
1989; Boyce, 2002 ).
If political power were distributed equally across the population, and
social decisions were based simply on cost–beneﬁt calculations, then
purchasing power would be the only dimension of human differentiation
that matters for environmental decisions. Once we recognize, however, that
political power in practice is unequally distributed, and that it tends to be
correlated with purchasing power – that is, wealth and political inﬂuence
generally go together – then both dimensions of social differentiation
matter, and reinforce each other.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF INEQUALITY:
TWO HYPOTHESES
Two hypotheses can be advanced about the environmental impact of
inequalities in the distribution of purchasing power and political power:
/C15First, environmental harm is not randomly distributed across the
population, but instead reﬂects the distribution of wealth and power.
JAMES K. BOYCE274
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 11]]
The relatively wealthy and powerful tend to beneﬁt disproportionately
from the economic activities that generate environmental harm. The
relatively poor and powerless tend to bear a disproportionate share of the
environmental costs.
/C15Second, the total magnitude of environmental harm depends on the extent
of inequality. Societies with wider inequalities of wealth and power will
tend to have more environmental harm. Conversely, societies with
relatively modest degrees of economic and political disparities will tend to
have less environmental harm.
Environmental Injustice
The ﬁrst hypothesis operates on both the beneﬁt side and the cost side of the
coin. Beneﬁts from economic activities that inﬂict environmental harm
accrue to consumers insofar as the savings from cost externalization (for
example, releasing toxic chemicals out the smokestack rather than spending
money on pollution control) are passed to them in the form of lower prices.
Beneﬁts accrue to the owners of ﬁrms insofar as they are able to capture
these savings in the form of higher proﬁts. On the consumer side, the rich
generally get a bigger share of the beneﬁts, for the simple reason that they
consume more than the poor. On the producer side, again they get a bigger
share of the beneﬁts, since they own more productive assets, including
corporate stocks. For these reasons, no matter what the division of gains
between consumers and ﬁrms, the rich reap the largest share. Even if
the costs of environmental harm were equally shared by all – for example,
if everyone breathes the same polluted air and drinks the same polluted
water – this would skew the net beneﬁts from environmentally harmful
economic activities in favor of the wealthy.
In practice, many environmental costs are localized, rather than being
uniformly distributed across space. This makes it possible for those who are
relatively wealthy and powerful to distance themselves from environmental
harm caused by economic activities ( Princen, 1997 ). Within a metropolitan
area, for example, the wealthy can afford to live in neighborhoods with
cleaner air and more environmental amenities. Furthermore, sometimes
there are private substitutes for public environmental quality. In urban
India, for instance, where public water supplies are often contaminated,
the upper and middle classes can afford to consume bottled water. The
poor cannot. In such cases, because access to private substitutes is
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 275
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 12]]
based on ability to pay, again the rich are better able to avoid environ-
mental harm.
A substantial literature on environmental justice in the United States has
documented the fact that low-income people and communities of color
(that is, communities with above-average percentages of non-white and non-
Anglo residents) often bear disproportionate environmental harms – see, for
example, the chapters in this volume by Bullard (2007), Mohai (2007), and
Taylor (2007); see also Szasz and Meuser (1997) , Bullard and Johnson
(2000), Pastor (2003) , and Boyce (2007) . These ﬁndings are consistent with
the ﬁrst hypothesis. A number of these studies have found that race and
ethnicity matter, even when controlling for income: communities with
higher percentages of African-Americans, Latinos, Asian-Americans, and
Native Americans tend to face greater environmental hazards – see, for
example, Bouwes, Hassur, and Shapiro (2003) and Ash and Fetter (2004) .
This ﬁnding suggests that political power (which is correlated with race and
ethnicity in the United States) has an impact on exposure to environmental
harm, above and beyond whatever can be explained simply by differences in
purchasing power.
Even in cases of environmental harm from which there is no escape –
widely dispersed pollutants and global climate change are examples –
those who are relatively poor and powerless tend to be most vulnerable.
Living closest to the margin of survival, they have least ability to with-
stand adversity. They have less ability to afford remedial measures, like
health care. And they have less political clout to secure remedial actions
from government authorities. Similar vulnerability disparities are revealed
by natural disasters, as when Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans in
August 2005. ‘‘In a sense, environmental justice is about slow-motion
disasters,’’ in the words of a recent study of Katrina’s impact, ‘‘and
disasters reveal environmental injustice in a fast-forward mode’’ ( Pastor
et al., 2006, p. 9 ).
More Inequality, More Harm?
The second hypothesis – that more inequality causes more environmental
harm overall – may be less intuitively evident than the ﬁrst. Inequalities of
wealth and power could have two opposing effects. When the beneﬁciaries
from environmentally harmful activities are more powerful than those who
bear their costs, greater inequality can be expected to result in more
environmental harm. On the other hand, when those who bear the costs are
JAMES K. BOYCE276
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 13]]
more powerful than the beneﬁciaries, we might expect the opposite: greater
inequality yields less environmental harm.
Which scenario is more common? The second one certainly occurs,
for example, when African tribespeople are expelled from their tradi-
tional hunting grounds on the grounds that their activities are envi-
ronmentally harmful, in order to create protected areas for the enjoyment
of afﬂuent foreign tourists, a phenomenon that has been labeled
‘‘coercive conservation’’ (see, for example, Peluso, 1993 ; Neumann, 2001 ;
Mulder & Coppolillo, 2005, pp. 31–37 ). The slum clearance program
in Bangladesh described in the prologue is another example. But there
are good reasons to believe that the ﬁrst scenario is far more prevalent. If, as
I have argued above, the beneﬁts of environmentally harmful activities
ﬂow disproportionately to the relatively well-off by virtue of their higher
consumption and capital ownership, and purchasing power is correlated
with political power, it follows that the beneﬁciaries of these activities
tend to be more powerful than those who bear net costs – in which case,
wider inequalities can be expected to translate into greater environ-
mental harm.
In a statistical test of the second hypothesis, Boyce, Klemer, Templet,
and Willis (1999) found that among the 50 U.S. states, those with more
equitable distributions of power (measured by voter participation, educa-
tional attainments, tax fairness, and Medicaid access) tend to have stronger
environmental policies and better environmental outcomes. Further
evidence in support of this hypothesis comes from a study of the relation-
ship between residential segregation and cancer risks from air pollution
in the United States, which found that greater segregation on racial
and ethnic lines is correlated with worse environmental and health out-
comes for all groups, not only for people of color ( Morello-Frosch &
Jesdale, 2006 ).
Similarly, cross-country studies at the international level have found that
a more equitable distribution of power – measured by such variables as
democracy, political and civil rights, and adult literacy – is correlated with
better environmental quality, even while controlling for other variables such
as differences in per capita income (see, for example, Torras & Boyce, 1998 ;
Barrett & Graddy, 2000 ; for a review of these and other studies, see also
Boyce, 2007 ).
In sum, both theoretical reasoning and empirical evidence support the
conclusion that inequality is bad for the environment. People are not like
pondweed. How we treat the natural environment depends on how we treat
each other.
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 277
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 14]]
ROOM FOR HOPE
There is another important way that humans differ from pondweed: we have
brains. Indeed we are exceptional among all species in our ability to
accumulate knowledge, pass it from one generation to the next, and change
our behavior accordingly. This includes knowledge about our interactions
with the natural environment and with each other.
Respecting Nature’s Limits
We can learn how to respect nature’s limits, and thus how to limit
environmental harm – if we choose to do so. We can learn about the growth
rates of renewable natural resources, such as trees in forest and ﬁsh in the
sea, and we can manage our own harvests of these resources to ensure
sustainable yields. We can learn about nature’s ﬁnite stocks of non-
renewable resources, such as minerals and fossil fuels, and we can develop
recycling and renewable alternatives to avert future shortages. We can learn
about the limited capacity of air, lands, and water bodies to safely absorb
and break down wastes, and we can limit the rates at which we discharge
pollutants accordingly.
As an illustration, consider our response to the threat posed by chemicals
that were depleting the Earth’s protective ozone layer, exposing life on the
planet to increasing levels of ultraviolet-B radiation. The danger was not
recognized until the early 1970s, when scientists ﬁrst hypothesized that
chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs), man-made compounds used for a variety of
purposes, including aerosol propellants and air conditioner coolants, were
breaking down ozone molecules in the Earth’s stratosphere. The harm
was invisible but insidious. In a remarkable instance of international
co-operation, by 1987 the nations of the world had agreed to curtail their
CFC emissions via the Montreal Protocol ( Haas, 1992 ). No other species is
capable of such conscious self-regulating behavior.
Of course, to say that we can modify our actions on the basis of
knowledge about nature’s limits does not mean that we necessarily will do
so. But if we choose to act, we can. And, as the Montreal Protocol
illustrates, sometimes we do. The question is, why do we act to protect the
environment in some times and places, and not in others? The answer,
I believe, is that whether and how we act (or fail to act) depends on the
balance of power in the present generation between those who beneﬁt by
JAMES K. BOYCE278
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 15]]
ignoring nature’s limits and those who pay the price, and on whether we
embrace an ethic of responsibility toward future generations.
Nor do I wish to imply that humans are omniscient, understanding fully
the consequences of our actions. Had scientists been a few decades slower
to grasp the environmental implications of CFC emissions, we might not
have recognized the threat until it was too late. We need to understand not
only nature’s limits, but also the limits of our own knowledge. Given the
uncertainties and unknowns about the environmental impacts of our
actions, prudence demands that we adopt a ‘‘precautionary’’ approach to
environmental policy (for discussions, see Harremoe¨s et al., 2002 ; Dorman,
2005).
Investing in Nature’s Wealth
Humans can not only deplete nature’s wealth; we also can increase it. If our
value system is founded on long-term human well-being – if this is the basis
on which we compare states of the world, and deﬁne what is good and
bad for the environment – then we can improve the environment as well as
harm it.
There are three ways that humans invest in nature’s wealth:
/C15Ecological restoration repairs past harms. Examples include the reforesta-
tion of deforested landscapes; the replenishment of depleted ﬁsheries; the
clean-up of contaminated soils and water bodies; and the restoration of
degraded wildlife habitat.
2
/C15Co-evolution refers to human modiﬁcations that create an environment
that is better able to support long-term human well-being. One example is
‘‘soil banking’’: farming practices that build deeper and more fertile soils,
such as terra preta do indio (‘dark earth of the Indians’) in Amazonia
(Mann, 2002 ) and those of the acequia landscape mosaic in the upper
Rio Grande bioregion of the southwestern United States ( Pen˜a, 2003; for
more examples of soil banking, see Brookﬁeld, 2001, pp. 96–97 ). Another
example – arguably the most valuable investment in nature’s wealth in
human history – is the domestication of plants and animals that began
some 10,000 years ago, and the subsequent evolution of genetic diversity
in crops and livestock (see Boyce, 2006 ).
/C15Environmental preventive health refers to measures to reduce the
prevalence of pathogens and disease-bearing insects. One example,
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 279
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 16]]
already mentioned, is the eradication of the smallpox virus through
an international effort that culminated in the mid-1970s. Another
example is the modiﬁcation of aquatic habitats to reduce mosquito popu-
lations, a form of investment that played a major role in eliminating
malaria from Europe and North America ( Kitron & Spielman, 1989 ;
Willott, 2004 ).
In all three ways, human beings can and sometimes do improve the
environment, from the standpoint of long-term human well-being. Humans
are not necessarily a blight on the face of the planet, a cancer that ultimately
will destroy its host. We have learned a great deal about how to respect
nature’s limits and invest in nature’s wealth, and we have the capacity to
learn more. In our dealings with nature, there is room for hope.
Making Social Change
The inequalities of power and wealth that generate environmental harm are
not forces of nature. Political and economic disparities are social
constructions, and as such they can be reconstructed.
To be sure, there is no certainty that social change will proceed inexorably
toward more democratic distributions of political power and more
egalitarian distributions of purchasing power. It is all too easy to ﬁnd past
and present examples of movements in the opposite direction. But to say
that something is not inevitable is not to say that it is impossible.
In fact, an even stronger claim is possible: there is ample evidence that the
overall trend in human history, notwithstanding periodic reversals, is
toward more equality in our social arrangements. Only three centuries ago,
monarchs and aristocracies ruled most of the world. A century and a half
ago, slavery was still legal in much of the United States. The state of
Massachusetts, the ﬁrst in the country to mandate free primary education
for all children, did so only in 1852; it was not until 1918 that all states had
followed suit. The amendment to the U.S. constitution that granted women
the right to vote was adopted less than a century ago. In much of Asia and
Africa, colonial rule ended only two generations ago. It has been little more
than a decade since apartheid ended in South Africa. ‘‘The arc of the moral
universe is long,’’ Dr. Martin Luther King remarked in his 1965
commencement address at Oberlin College, ‘‘but it bends toward justice’’
(King, 1965).
There is room for hope in our dealings with each other, too.
JAMES K. BOYCE280
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 17]]
ONE WORLD, READY OR NOT
Both the prospects and need for changes in our relationships with
nature and each other are affected by changes in the scale at which
human interactions occur. For much of human history, the implications
of the fact that we share a single planet were hidden from view by
spatial fragmentation. This slowly changed over time, especially with the
development of agriculture, states, and more effective means of transport
beginning some ten millennia ago. The pace of change accelerated in the
past few centuries, in the process nowadays dubbed ‘‘globalization.’’ Today
the fact that we live in one world is not only a physical reality, but also an
economic, cultural, and political reality.
Uneven Globalization: Markets and Governance
Globalization has proceeded most rapidly in the economic arena. Around
the world, production and consumption are being increasingly integrated
into a single market. Indeed, for many the term ‘‘globalization’’ has come to
signify not only the process of economic integration, but also the
subordination of more and more economic activity across the globe to the
laws of the market. The extension of the market brings tangible beneﬁts, as
Adam Smith famously observed in The Wealth of Nations : responding to
price signals, decentralized producers are guided by an ‘‘invisible hand’’ to
specialize in what they can make most cheaply, unleashing impressive
productivity gains.
But the market also has important limitations:
/C15Market failure: One way to make goods cheaply is to push costs onto
others – generating what economists call ‘‘negative externalities.’’ For
example, ﬁrms that do not spend money on pollution control may enjoy a
competitive advantage over ﬁrms that do. As markets extend their reach,
the costs of such market failures can grow alongside the beneﬁts of
specialization.
/C15Fairness: The production and distribution of goods and services for the
market are driven by effective demand – that is, willingness to pay backed
by ability to pay. An inequitable distribution of purchasing power leads to
an inequitable distribution of resources.
/C15Resilience: The market pursues a logic of short-term optimization: lowest-
cost producers using the ‘‘best’’ technology can undersell rivals and
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 281
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 18]]
ultimately drive them out of business. As a result, producers tend to
converge on the same technology. Yet resilience – the ability to withstand
shocks and adapt to changing circumstances – requires a range of
alternative technological options ( Rammel & van den Bergh, 2003 ).
/C15Moral capital: Finally, by elevating a narrowly conceived ‘‘self-interest’’
above all other values, markets may lead to depreciation of moral capital
that is crucial to the functioning of society. In fact, widespread
commitment to moral precepts is necessary for markets themselves to
function, since respect for rights and contractual obligations typically
rests not on self-interest but instead on accepted norms about what is the
right thing to do (for discussion, see Basu, 1983 ; Sen, 1986 ; Bell, 1996 ).
For all four reasons, the globalization of markets needs to be complemented
by the globalization of governance. The latter includes not only formal
international institutions and inter-governmental agreements but also
informal governance by non-state institutions and networks. Many of the
problems associated with globalization arise from the fact that it has been
uneven: the development of global governance has lagged behind the
development of global markets ( Young, 1994 ; Boyce, 2004 ).
NAFTA and the Environment: A Case Study in Uneven Globalization
The environmental consequences of uneven globalization can be illustrated
by looking at the effects of the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA), the free trade agreement among the United States, Mexico, and
Canada that went into effect in 1994. In the early 1990s, the debate over
NAFTA split the U.S. environmental movement. Some maintained that the
trade agreement would promote ‘‘harmonization upwards,’’ a continental
convergence to higher environmental standards, by generating higher
incomes and stronger demand for environmental protection in Mexico.
Others contended that it would spark a ‘‘race to the bottom,’’ as ﬁrms
moved (or threatened to move) south of the U.S.–Mexico border to take
advantage of lax environmental regulations.
Both sides in the debate shared one premise: environmental practices in
Mexico were evidently inferior to those in the United States and Canada.
This assumption helps to explain why few environmentalists voiced concern
about what in the end may turn out to be NAFTA’s most profound
environmental impact: the erosion of Mexico’s rich heritage of genetically
diverse maize varieties by cheap corn imported from the United States.
JAMES K. BOYCE282
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 19]]
Maize (‘corn’ in U.S. parlance) is the single most important crop in both
countries.3 On the eve of NAFTA, U.S. maize was sold at roughly $110 per
ton at the border, whereas Mexican growers were receiving $240 per ton for
their crops. With the dismantling of trade barriers, the Mexican price is now
converging to the lower U.S. price, hitting hard at the livelihoods of
Mexican campesinos.
4
By the measuring stick of market prices, U.S. farmers are more efﬁcient
than Mexican growers. But this competitive edge results, in no small
measure, from the neglect of market failures on both sides of the border, as
well as from government subsidies and natural advantages such as more
regular rainfall in the U.S. corn belt ( Boyce, 1996 ). U.S. corn production
relies on massive applications of pesticides, fertilizers, and energy inputs, all
of which generate substantial environmental harm. The resulting costs do
not ﬁgure in the market price.
At the same time, the campesino farmers of southern and central Mexico
today provide a great ‘‘positive externality’’ to humankind by sustaining
genetic diversity in one of the world’s most important food crops. In their
small plots, where corn was ﬁrst domesticated some seven millennia ago, the
maize plant continues to evolve via the process Darwin called ‘‘artiﬁcial
selection,’’ as farmers select seeds for the following year’s crop from the
plants that perform best in the face of changing conditions. Mexican farmers
still grow thousands of varieties of maize. In the United States, by contrast,
fewer than a dozen varieties now account for half of the country’s total corn
acreage.
As a result of its low diversity, the U.S. corn crop has a high degree of
genetic vulnerability – the eggs-in-one-basket syndrome – a problem
dramatically revealed in 1970 when a new strain of leaf blight destroyed
one-ﬁfth of the nation’s harvest. In the effort to stay ahead of the insects and
plant diseases that evolve rapidly in genetically uniform ﬁelds, U.S. plant
breeders engage in a ‘‘varietal relay race,’’ constantly seeking to develop new
resistant varieties. The average commercial lifespan of a corn variety in the
United States is only seven years, after which it is replaced by new ones. In
effect, modern agriculture substitutes diversity through time for diversity at
any point in time. The raw material that plant breeders use in this relay race
is the genetic diversity that has been bequeathed to us by generations of
small farmers in Mexico and elsewhere.
5
The irony is that under NAFTA, the success of U.S. corn production in
the marketplace is undermining the genetic base on which its own long-term
viability depends. The globalization of the market is being accompanied by
the globalization of market failure, and a loss of resilience. In the short term,
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 283
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 20]]
the main people harmed by this process are the Mexican campesinos, who
lack the political power to ensure that their investments in nature’s wealth
are rewarded. In the long term, those harmed are future generations around
the world, whose food security is being undermined by the erosion of crop
genetic diversity.
Remedying this environmental harm will require more than defensive
actions by single individuals, communities, or states, important though these
may be. Ultimately this and other transnational environmental problems
require building institutions that bridge the gap between the globalization of
markets and the globalization of governance (for discussion of formal and
informal institutions that could help to conserve crop genetic diversity, see
Mann, 2004 ; Boyce, 2006 ).
CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this chapter, I have explored some of the implications of recognizing that
environmental harm is not a random by-product of economic activities, but
instead a cost that is imposed on some and that beneﬁts others. Rectifying
the market failures and governance failures that lead to environmental harm
requires repairing the disparities of wealth and power that enable these
failures.
This does not mean that greater equality is a panacea for all environ-
mental ills. A more democratic distribution of power and a more egalitarian
distribution of wealth are not all that is needed to prevent environmental
harm. To say that these are necessary does imply that they are sufﬁcient.
Safeguarding the natural environment also will require us to cultivate an
ethic of moral responsibility to others – particularly when the costs of
environmental harm would primarily fall upon future generations.
We can have a healthy environment, and bequeath one to future
generations, by respecting nature’s limits and investing in nature’s wealth.
Achieving these goals does not only require rebalancing our relationships
with nature. It will also require rebalancing our relationships with our fellow
humans.
NOTES
1. For accounts of the famine and its causes, see Sen (1981) and Ravallion (1987).
For an account of the life in the village, see Hartmann and Boyce (1979, 1983) .
JAMES K. BOYCE284
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 21]]
2. For examples, see Narain and Agarwal (2007) on water harvesting in semi-arid
zones of rural India, and Rahman and Minkin (2007) on the rehabilitation of inland
ﬁsheries in Bangladesh. A distinction is sometimes made between restoration and
rehabilitation, with the former referring to returning an ecosystem to ‘‘its historic
trajectory’’ and the latter to ‘‘the reparation of ecosystem processes, productivity and
services’’ ( Society for Ecological Restoration, 2004 ). If humans are regarded as an
alien species – if we are truly apart from nature, not a part of it – this distinction
makes sense: one may imagine the ‘‘historic trajectory’’ of ecosystems in the absence
of any human impacts whatsoever. In my view, this is a peculiar view of history. In
any event, proponents of this distinction have concluded that restoration ‘‘probably
encompasses a large majority of project work that has previously been identiﬁed as
rehabilitation.’’
3. Michael Pollan (2006, pp. 22–23) observes that once the cycling of corn through
animals is counted, the average American today has more corn in his diet than the
average Mexican.
4. For further discussion, see Boyce (1996, 2004) . So far, the sharp decline
in Mexican corn production that was predicted by many as a result of NAFTA
has not occurred, apparently because economic opportunities elsewhere in the
Mexican economy have been so scarce (see Ackerman, Wise, Gallagher, Ney, &
Flores, 2003 ).
5. Samples of many Mexican maize varieties are stored in ‘‘seed banks’’ at
agricultural research institutes. But seed banks are insecure, being subject to the
perennial hazards of inadequate funding, accidents, and war. Moreover, having seeds
in the bank is not the same as knowing about varietal properties such as pest
resistance and climate sensitivity, information that is most readily obtained in the
ﬁeld. And even at best, seed banks can conserve only the existing stock of genetic
diversity; they cannot replicate the ongoing process of evolution that takes place in
the farmers’ ﬁelds. For further discussion of the value of in situ (in-the-ﬁeld) crop
genetic diversity, see Brush (2003) and Boyce (2006) .
REFERENCES
Ackerman, F., Wise, T. A., Gallagher, K. P., Ney, L., & Flores, R. (2003). Free trade, corn, and
the environment: Environmental impacts of US–Mexico corn trade under NAFTA.
Working Paper No. 03-06. Tufts University, Global Development and Environment
Institute, Medford, Massachusetts.
Ash, M., & Fetter, T. R. (2004). Who lives on the wrong side of the environmental tracks?
Social Science Quarterly , 85(2), 441–462.
Barrett, S., & Graddy, K. (2000). Freedom, growth, and the environment. Environment and
Development Economics, 5, 433–456.
Bartlett, R. (1989). Economics and power: An inquiry into human relations and markets .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Basu, K. (1983). On why we do not try to walk off without paying after a taxi ride. Economic
and Political Weekly , 18, 2011–2012.
Bell, D. (1996). The cultural contradictions of capitalism (2nd ed.) . New York: Basic Books.
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 285
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 22]]
Bouwes, N., Hassur, S., & Shapiro, M. (2003). Information for empowerment: The EPA’s
risk-screening environmental indicators project. In: J. K. Boyce & B. G. Shelley (Eds),
Natural assets: Democratizing environmental ownership . Washington, DC: Island
Press, ch. 6.
Boyce, J. K. (1996). Ecological distribution, agricultural trade liberalization, and in situ genetic
diversity. Journal of Income Distribution , 6(2), 263–284.
Boyce, J. K. (2002). The political economy of the environment . Northampton: Edward Elgar.
Boyce, J. K. (2004). Green and brown? Globalization and the environment. Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 20(1), 105–128.
Boyce, J. K. (2006). A future for small farms? Biodiversity and sustainable agriculture. In:
J. K. Boyce, S. Cullenberg, P. K. Pattanaik & R. Pollin (Eds), Human development in the
era of globalization: Essays in honor of Keith B. Grifﬁn (pp. 83–104). Northampton:
Edward Elgar.
Boyce, J. K. (2007). Inequality and environmental protection. In: J.-M. Baland, P. Bardhan &
S. Bowles (Eds), Inequality, collective action, and environmental sustainability
(pp. 314–348). Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Boyce, J. K., Klemer, A. R., Templet, P. H., & Willis, C. E. (1999). Power distribution, the
environment, and public health: A state-level analysis. Ecological Economics , 29,
127–140. Reprinted in Boyce (2002, ch. 6).
Brookﬁeld, H. (2001). Exploring agrodiversity. New York: Columbia University Press.
Brown, L. (1978). The twenty-ninth day: Accommodating human needs and numbers to the Earth’s
resources. New York: Norton.
Brush, S. B. (2003). The lighthouse and the potato: Internalizing the value of crop genetic
diversity. In: J. K. Boyce & B. G. Shelley (Eds), Natural assets: Democratizing
environmental ownership. Washington, DC: Island Press, ch. 10.
Bullard, R. D., & Johnson, G. S. (2000). Environmental justice: Grassroots activism and its
impact on public policy decision making. Journal of Social Issues , 56(3), 555–578.
Dorman, P. (2005). Evolving knowledge and the precautionary principle. Ecological Economics,
53, 169–176.
Haas, P. (1992). Banning chloroﬂuorocarbons: Epistemic community efforts to protect
stratospheric ozone. International Organization, 46(1), 187–224.
Harremoe¨s, P., et al. (2002). The precautionary principle in the 20th century: Late lessons from
early warnings. London: Earthscan, for the European Environment Agency.
Hartmann, B., & Boyce, J. K. (1979). Needless hunger: Voices from a Bangladesh village .
San Francisco: Institute for Food and Development Policy.
Hartmann, B., & Boyce, J. K. (1983). A quiet violence: View from a Bangladesh village. London/
San Francisco: Zed Press/Institute for Food and Development Policy.
King, M. L. (1965). Staying awake through a great revolution. Commencement address at
Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio, June.
Kitron, U., & Spielman, A. (1989). Suppression of transmission of malaria through source
reduction: Antianopheline measures applied in Israel, the United States, and Italy.
Reviews of Infectious Diseases , 11(3), 391–406.
Mann, C. (2002). The real dirt on rainforest fertility. Science, 297, 920–923.
Mann, C. (2004). Diversity on the farm. New York/Amherst, Massachusetts: Ford Foundation/
Political Economy Research Institute. Available at http://www.peri.umass.edu/
ﬁleadmin/pdf/Mann.pdf
JAMES K. BOYCE286
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 23]]
Morello-Frosch, R. A., & Jesdale, B. (2006). Separate and unequal: Residential segregation and
estimated cancer risks associated with ambient air toxics in US metropolitan areas.
Environmental Health Perspectives , 114(3), 386–393.
Mulder, M. B., & Coppolillo, P. (2005). Conservation: Linking ecology, economics, and culture .
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Narain, S., & Agarwal, A. (2007). Harvesting the rain: Fighting ecological poverty
through participatory democracy. In: J. K. Boyce, S. Narain & E. A. Stanton (Eds),
Reclaiming nature: Environmental justice and ecological restoration . London: Anthem
Press, ch. 3.
Neumann, R. P. (2001). Disciplining peasants in Tanzania: From state violence to self-
surveillance in wildlife conservation. In: M. Watts & N. Peluso (Eds), Violent
environments. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, ch. 13.
Pastor, M. (2003). Building social capital to protect natural capital: The quest for
environmental justice. In: J. K. Boyce & B. G. Shelley (Eds), Natural assets:
Democratizing environmental ownership . Washington, DC: Island Press, ch. 4.
Pastor, M., Bullard, R. D., Boyce, J. K., Fothergill, A., Morello-Frosch, R., & Wright, B.
(2006). In the wake of the storm: Environment, disaster, and race after Katrina. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Peluso, N. (1993). Coercing conservation: The politics of state resource control. Global
Environmental Change, 3(2), 199–217.
Pen˜a, D. (2003). The watershed commonwealth of the upper Rio Grande. In: J. K. Boyce &
B. G. Shelley (Eds), Natural assets: Democratizing environmental ownership. Washington,
DC: Island Press, ch. 9.
Pollan, M. (2006). Omnivore’s dilemma: A natural history of four meals . New York: Penguin
Press.
Princen, T. (1997). The shading and distancing of commerce: When internalization is not
enough. Ecological Economics , 20, 235–253. Reprinted In: T. Princen, M. Mainates &
K. Conca (Eds), Confronting consumption, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002, ch. 5.
Rahman, M., & Minkin, S. F. (2007). Net beneﬁts: The ecological restoration of inland ﬁsheries
in Bangladesh. In: J. K. Boyce, S. Narain & E. A. Stanton (Eds), Reclaiming nature:
Environmental justice and ecological restoration . London: Anthem Press, ch. 4.
Rammel, C., & van den Bergh, J. C. J. M. (2003). Evolutionary policies for sustainable
development: Adaptive ﬂexibility and risk minimising. Ecological Economics , 47,
121–133.
Ravallion, M. (1987). Markets and Famines . Oxford: Clarendon.
Sen, A. (1981). Poverty and famines: An essay on entitlements and deprivation . Oxford:
Clarendon.
Sen, A. (1986). Adam Smith’s prudence. In: S. Lall & F. Stewart (Eds), Theory and reality in
development. London: Macmillan.
Sen, A. (2004). Why we should preserve the spotted owl. London Review of Books , 26(3),
February 5.
Society for Ecological Restoration. (2004). The SER International primer on ecological
restoration (Available at www.ser.org). Tucson: Society for Ecological Restoration
International.
Szasz, A., & Meuser, M. (1997). Environmental inequalities: Literature review and proposals
for new directions in research and theory. Current Sociology, 45(3), 99–120.
Is Inequality Bad for the Environment? 287
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 24]]
Torras, M., & Boyce, J. K. (1998). Income, inequality, and pollution: A reassessment of the
environmental Kuznets curve. Ecological Economics , 25, 147–160. Reprinted in Boyce
(2002, ch. 5).
Willott, E. (2004). Restoring nature, without mosquitoes? Restoration Ecology, 12(2), 147–153.
World Commission on Environment and Development. (1987). Our common future
(the Brundtland Report). New York: Oxford University Press.
Young, O. (1994). International governance: Protecting the environment in a stateless society .
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
JAMES K. BOYCE288
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)


[[PAGE 25]]
This article has been cited by:
1. Alexandre Berthe, Luc Elie. 2015. Mechanisms explaining the impact of economic
inequality on environmental deterioration. Ecological Economics  116, 191-200.
[CrossRef]
2. Kavya Michael, Vamsi Vakulabharanam. 2015. Class and climate change in post-
reform India. Climate and Development 1-10. [CrossRef]
3. Nilufar Matin, Mohammad Islam, Musingo Mbuvi, Bernard Odit, Paul Ongugo,
Mohammad Syed. 2014. Group Inequality and Environmental Sustainability:
Insights from Bangladesh and Kenyan Forest Commons. Sustainability 6,
1462-1488. [CrossRef]
4. David N. Pellow, Hollie Nyseth Brehm. 2013. An Environmental Sociology for
the Twenty-First Century. Annual Review of Sociology 39, 229-250. [CrossRef]
5. Prakash Kashwan. 2013. The politics of rights-based approaches in conservation.
Land Use Policy 31, 613-626. [CrossRef]
6. Matthieu Clement, Andre Meunie. 2010. Is Inequality Harmful for the
Environment? An Empirical Analysis Applied to Developing and Transition
Countries. Review of Social Economy 68, 413-445. [CrossRef]
Downloaded by Chinese University of Hong Kong At 20:40 01 February 2016 (PT)
