[[PAGE 1]]
1. Introduction
The distribution of flood risk in urban areas is highly heterogeneous (Grasham et al.,  2019), with the ad -
verse impacts of flooding experienced disproportionately by the poor (Douglas et al., 2008; Filho et al.,  2018; 
Oliver-Smith et al.,  2017; van Voorst,  2015). Flood risk is particularly acute in unplanned, informal urban 
settlements, which are home to more than 1 billion people worldwide (World Health Organization & UN 
Habitat,  2016). In these communities, weak governance and systemic inequalities have resulted in a lack 
of effective policy to mitigate and adapt to the elevated flood risk (Grasham et al.,  2019). Instead, many ap-
proaches to flood risk management have only succeeded in magnifying the flood risk (Douglas et al.,  2008), 
worsening social inequality and entrenching poverty (Amoako,  2016). The rate of urbanization will con -
tinue to rise until around 2050 (UN DESA,  2019), with the number of people living informally expected 
to reach 2 billion (World Health Organization & UN Habitat,  2016). Around 90% of future urbanization 
will occur in Africa and Asia (UN DESA,  2019), where climate change is likely to increase the urban flood 
hazard (Dottori et al.,  2018). Consequently, there is a need to improve our knowledge about the dynamic 
relationship between urban flood risk management, inequality and poverty, to inform the development of 
sustainable and inclusive policies for reducing urban flood risk (Grasham et al., 2019). Here, we address this 
knowledge gap by developing a system dynamics model for evaluating the impact of alternative approaches 
to flood risk management on inequality and poverty in stratified urban societies.
Flood risk is a function of the specific characteristics of the flood hazard and the exposure and vulnerability 
of society to the hazard (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2015). Related to flood risk is the concept of resilience, which 
we define here as “a neighborhood's capacity to weather crises such as disasters and engage in effective and 
efficient recovery through coordinated efforts and cooperative activities” (Aldrich,  2012). In developing 
countries, rapid urbanization and population growth combined with systemic factors such as complex land 
tenure arrangements, inadequate transportation and weak governance, as well as the legacy of colonialism 
(Enqvist & Ziervogel,  2019), has led to the proliferation of unplanned urban settlements which lack basic 
Abstract  The exposure of urban populations to flooding is highly heterogeneous, with the negative 
impacts of flooding experienced disproportionately by the poor. In developing countries experiencing 
rapid urbanization and population growth a key distinction in the urban landscape is between planned 
development and unplanned, informal development, which often occurs on marginal, flood-prone land. 
Flood risk management in the context of informality is challenging, and may exacerbate existing social 
inequalities and entrench poverty. Here, we adapt an existing socio-hydrological model of human-flood 
interactions to account for a stratified urban society consisting of planned and informal settlements. In 
the first instance, we use the model to construct four system archetypes based on idealized scenarios 
of risk reduction and disaster recovery. We then perform a sensitivity analysis to examine the relative 
importance of the differential values of vulnerability, risk-aversion, and flood awareness in determining 
the relationship between flood risk management and social inequality. The model results suggest that 
reducing the vulnerability of informal communities to flooding plays an important role in reducing 
social inequality and enabling sustainable economic growth, even when the exposure to the flood hazard 
remains high. Conversely, our model shows that increasing risk aversion may accelerate the decline of 
informal communities by suppressing economic growth. On this basis, we argue for urban flood risk 
management which is rooted in pro-poor urban governance and planning agendas which recognize the 
legitimacy and permanence of informal communities in cities.
MOULDS ET AL.
© 2021. The Authors.
This is an open access article under 
the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which permits use, 
distribution and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original work is 
properly cited.
Modeling the Impacts of Urban Flood Risk Management 
on Social Inequality
Simon Moulds1 , Wouter Buytaert1 , Michael R. Templeton1, and Ishmael Kanu2
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK, 2Department of Civil 
Engineering, Fourah Bay College, University of Sierra Leone, Freetown, Sierra Leone
Key Points:
•  The distribution of flood risk in 
urban areas is uneven, with the 
negative impacts experienced 
disproportionately by the urban poor
•  Our model shows that reducing the 
vulnerability of informal residents to 
flooding can reduce inequality, even 
when their exposure is high
•  Based on the model results, we argue 
that urban flood risk management 
should be rooted in pro-poor urban 
governance and planning agendas
Correspondence to:
S. Moulds,
simon.moulds@imperial.ac.uk
Citation:
Moulds, S., Buytaert, W., Templeton, 
M. R., & Kanu, I. (2021). Modeling 
the impacts of urban flood risk 
management on social inequality. 
Water Resources Research, 57, 
e2020WR029024. https://doi.
org/10.1029/2020WR029024
Received 13 OCT 2020
Accepted 19 MAY 2021
10.1029/2020WR029024
RESEARCH ARTICLE
1 of 24


[[PAGE 2]]
Water Resources Research
infrastructure (Herslund et al.,  2016; Reckien et al.,  2017). As these communities are frequently situated 
on marginal, flood-prone land (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2010; Dodman et al.,  2019; Few,  2003), residents are 
exposed to fluvial and pluvial flooding (Douglas et al.,  2008), and related hazards such as landslides (Ezeh 
et al.,  2017; Few, 2003; Reckien et al.,  2017). A loss of infiltration capacity combined with inadequate drain-
age infrastructure heightens the severity of the hazard by increasing the amount of surface runoff (Douglas 
et al.,  2008). Cramped and crowded conditions and poor-quality housing increases the vulnerability of res-
idents to flooding (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2010; Zevenbergen et al.,  2008). In these conditions, flooding can 
cause physical, economic, and social devastation, including injury and loss of life, homelessness, and loss 
of income (Douglas,  2017). They are associated with physical and mental health impacts, including Cholera 
and diarrheal disease (Grasham et al.,  2019), post-traumatic stress disorder (Dai et al.,  2017), anxiety, and 
depression (Ahern et al.,  2005).
Poverty is a multidimensional phenomenon, which not only stems from a lack of resources, but also com -
prises a lack of opportunity, physical and economic security, and empowerment (Few,  2003). Ultimately 
these aspects of poverty stem from social inequality (Kjellstrom et al.,  2007), which encompasses the unjust 
distribution of income, benefits and services among citizens (Sayers et al.,  2018), a lack of recognition of 
social diversity in planning and policy initiatives, and a lack of inclusivity in political decision-making (Is -
lam & Winkel,  2017; Levy,  2018). Urban flood risk management—broadly defined as the implementation 
of structural and non-structural measures to reduce urban flood risk (Jha et al.,  2012)—has emerged as 
a central issue for urban planning (Amoako et al.,  2019; Di Baldassarre et al.,  2014; Watson,  2009). How-
ever, in many cities experiencing rapid unplanned development, the response of planning authorities 
to urban flooding has been reactionary and biased toward the priorities and needs of the powerful (e.g., 
Amoako,  2016; Cobbinah & Darkwah,  2017; Ríos,  2015). The result is urban flood risk management which 
to some extent either ignores or victimizes the urban poor (Amoako,  2016; van Voorst,  2015), creating a vi-
cious cycle whereby the initial inequality causes the poor to suffer disproportionately from flooding, which 
in turn deepens the subsequent inequality (Grasham et al., 2019; Islam & Winkel, 2017). Overall, this speaks 
to the argument that most water crises—including flooding—are in fact the result of a crisis of governance, 
arising when scientists, policy makers, and managers fail to understand or adequately consider the broader 
economic and socio-cultural context of water management interventions (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2019).
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop -
ment represent an ambitious and comprehensive blueprint to eliminate poverty, reduce inequality, and 
create a sustainable future for mankind (United Nations, 2015). Meeting the SDGs relating to water security 
and disaster risk reduction requires an inclusive approach which involves all actors and stakeholders, and 
recognizes the various ways in which the earth system and society interact (Bleischwitz et al.,  2018). How-
ever, traditional approaches to water management are characterized by technical solutions which disregard 
the dynamic feedbacks between natural and socio-technical aspects of coupled human-water systems (Di 
Baldassarre et  al.,  2013; Ziervogel et  al.,  2016), increasing the likelihood of negative unintended conse -
quences (Leong,  2018; Sivapalan et al.,  2014). Socio-hydrology seeks to address this deficiency by studying 
the two-way feedbacks and interactions between human and natural systems (Sivapalan et al., 2012), with a 
focus on identifying and understanding emergent phenomena arising from water management activities in 
a variety of contexts around the world (Konar et al.,  2019). Its holistic view of the water system means that 
socio-hydrology has been identified as having an important role to play in informing water management 
policies which address the SDGs (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2019).
Modeling has emerged as an important mode of inquiry in socio-hydrology which has yielded valua -
ble insights into the co-evolution of flood risk and society (Di Baldassarre et  al.,  2013,  2015; Srinivasan 
et al.,  2016). However, existing socio-hydrological models have critical shortcomings which limit their ca -
pacity to address many of the challenges associated with sustainable development (Blair & Buytaert,  2016; 
Di Baldassarre et al.,  2019). A fundamental weakness of current models is the formulation of urban socie -
ties as homogeneous entities which interact uniformly with the water cycle (e.g., Di Baldassarre et al., 2013; 
Garcia et al.,  2016). This simplifying assumption prevents models from considering important within-city 
heterogeneities (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2013), including the uneven distribution of exposure and vulnerabil-
ity to natural hazards among urban residents; the subjective determination of tolerable risk levels by indi -
viduals (Johnson,  2018); and the differential availability of mitigation and adaptation options across society 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
2 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 3]]
Water Resources Research
(Amoako,  2018). The resulting models are ill-equipped to provide insight into the relationship between 
urban water management and social inequality, with a likely consequence that models fail to capture im -
portant system behaviors (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2019). Given the prominence of reducing inequality to the 
SDGs, which are premised on the notion of “leaving no-one behind” (United Nations, 2015), there is a need 
to advance the current generation of socio-hydrological models to explicitly consider social heterogeneity if 
they are to provide a meaningful contribution to the sustainable development agenda.
Here, we put forward a novel approach to modeling feedbacks between human and natural systems which 
explicitly accounts for social heterogeneity in the context of urban flood risk management. While the link 
between flood risk and inequality is apparent in developed and developing cities around the world (e.g., 
Sayers et al.,  2018; Walker & Burningham,  2011), we focus here on rapidly urbanizing cities in low and 
middle income countries where informal development is a pervasive phenomenon, representing a funda -
mentally different challenge to flood risk management than those encountered in high income countries 
with lower rates of urbanization. We adapt an existing socio-hydrological model of floodplain dynamics 
(Di Baldassarre et  al.,  2013; Viglione et  al.,  2014) to account for a stratified urban society comprised of 
formal and informal settlements. With this conceptualization, we account for within-city heterogeneities 
in the distribution of flood risk, risk tolerance, and flood risk management. We develop a hypothetical case 
study consisting of a city divided into planned and unplanned settlements, and use the model to explore 
the dynamics between these two sections of society, and the co-evolution of the society as a whole, under 
four scenarios of flood risk management. The study is structured as follows. We first provide an overview 
of the current literature on the relationship between urban flood risk management and social inequality. 
This review informs our conceptual model, which is presented in the proceeding section. We describe the 
case study and four scenarios, and present the model results. Lastly, we critically review our findings, draw 
conclusions from the study, and highlight future research priorities.
2. Inequality and Urban Flood Risk Management
Here we assess the pathways through which urban planning and flood risk management may positively 
or negatively influence within-city inequality, drawing evidence from cities around the world. Our objec -
tive is not to provide an exhaustive review of the literature, but rather to draw out common themes in the 
interaction between urban flood risk management and social inequality which can be incorporated in our 
conceptual model.
Urban flood risk management activities may ignore informal settlements or target them with measures 
such as forcible evictions and site clearance. Based on evidence from Accra, Ghana, Amoako ( 2016) ar-
gues that the vulnerability and exposure of informal urban settlements to flood hazards is to a large extent 
shaped to by the posture and activities of the state and its urban governance institutions. Amoako ( 2016) 
identifies the positioning of urban authorities on a continuum between “brutal presence,” where residents 
of informal settlements are penalized through strict planning regulations, forced evictions, and demolition, 
and “convenient absence,” where the state absolves itself of responsibility for planning and the provision 
of infrastructure. Both extremes are associated with elevated flood risk, but for different reasons. In the 
first case, the use of aggressive actions to clear informal settlements fails to address the underlying fac -
tors driving this form of urbanization and simply displaces the perceived problem to other parts of the 
city (Amoako,  2016). Often, these locations may render the occupants even more disadvantaged in terms 
of accessing the labor market and environmental conditions (Ezeh et al.,  2017). Moreover, enforced relo-
cation may erode the social capital within and between social groups and, in doing so, reduce resilience 
(Aldrich,  2012; Mitra et al.,  2017). This is evident in Accra, Ghana, where successive actions of authorities 
to clear informal developments across the city have only served to expand the number of people living in 
the slums of Old Faddama and Agbogbloshie, located on the banks of the flood-prone and highly polluted 
Korle Lagoon (Amoako,  2016).
The “brutal presence” position described by Amoako ( 2016) goes hand in hand with that of “convenient 
absence,” since the eviction or demolition of one settlement tends to displace its former residents to other 
such neighbourhoods, usually with the tacit approval of those carrying out the eviction. Moreover, the en -
suing animosity between the authorities and residents undermines the legitimacy of the state to govern in 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
3 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 4]]
Water Resources Research
informal settlements (i.e., the social contract), promoting a vicious cycle of inaction (Mitra et al.,  2017). In 
interviews conducted by Amoako ( 2016), one official of the Accra Metropolitan Assembly Town and Coun-
try Planning Department observed that the initial settlers of Old Faddama in the early 1980s were ignored 
by city authorities since the buildings there “were temporary and that they (the residents) will go away due 
to the lack of basic household infrastructure and services.” However, neglect of Old Fadama by the city au-
thorities led to its continuous growth through the 1990s, mainly as the result of rural-urban migration and 
migration to Accra by those fleeing an ethnic conflict in northern Ghana (Amoako, 2016). The emergence of 
an electronic waste hub on the banks of the Odaw River near Old Fadama and Agbogbloshie has provided 
economic opportunities and, combined with the availability of affordable low-income housing, has fueled 
the rapid expansion of the two settlements since the turn of the millenium (Amoako et al., 2019). Elsewhere 
in Jakarta, Indonesia, city authorities absolve themselves of responsibility for flood risk management in 
informal settlements by blaming residents for the elevated risk, citing the construction of housing on flood-
prone land and the disposal of waste in watercourses (van Voorst,  2015).
The absence of city authorities from informal settlements is reflected in the reporting of disasters. In El 
Colli, Mexico, Gran Castro and Ramos De Robles  ( 2019) found that residents identified flooding as the 
most important threat to their community based on their recent experience of flood damage, even though 
no such flood events were recorded in official statistics. In many developing countries small and medium 
disasters are seldom reported (Bull-Kamanga et al.,  2003), even though cumulatively they may account for 
more casualties than large-scale disasters (Osuteye et al.,  2017). In Accra, the livelihoods of many inhabit -
ants center on petty trading and small-scale commerce, which are frequently disrupted by small-scale floods 
and other disasters (Douglas et al.,  2008; Satterthwaite & Bartlett, 2017). The ensuing losses may significant-
ly reduce the ability of households to buy food and pay essential bills, including those for healthcare and 
education (Douglas et al.,  2008). At the same time, the decision to reside in hazardous areas is itself often 
driven by socio-economic pressures (Johnson,  2018), with informal settlements usually situated close to 
potential job opportunities (Ezeh et al.,  2017). Hence, the growth of informal settlements may be seen as 
a trade-off between poverty and risk, whereby the urban poor accept an increase in exposure to multiple 
hazards in order to address the immediate concern of living in poverty (Ezzati et al.,  2018; Johnson,  2018). 
The threshold at which risk becomes intolerable risk varies according to circumstance and strongly influ -
ences decisions on how best to approach risk management (Johnson,  2018). A failure to understand the 
risk perceptions of informal communities—which begins with a lack of reporting of disasters—has tended 
to promote top-down, technocratic solutions to urban flood risk management which do not align with the 
needs and priorities of the urban poor (Ziervogel et al.,  2016).
In the absence of the state, adaptation to flooding in informal communities is often driven by bottom-up, 
community-based activities. Such actions have been observed in cities around the world. In Accra, 
Amoako ( 2018) studied three communities—Glefe, Agbogbloshie, and Old Fadama—which experience an -
nual flooding, observing that despite poor quality housing and environmental health conditions, the area 
and population of these communities continued to expand. They (Amoako,  2018) identified a range of ad -
aptation measures adopted by the communities, including restructuring buildings, constructing and main-
taining drainage channels, formulating evacuation plans and establishing safe havens. In Visakhapatnam, 
India, Jain and Bazaz ( 2020) found that people who had lived for more than five years in locations deemed 
untenable by city authorities due to the elevated disaster risk had in fact put in place adaptation strategies 
to reduce risk to a level which was acceptable to the community. This highlights the potential for conflict 
between city authorities and communities arising from the discrepancy in risk perceptions, and demon -
strates the importance of including the views of the community in disaster risk reduction plans (Jain & Ba-
zaz,  2020; Johnson,  2018; Ziervogel et al.,  2016). Flooding may also induce changes in governance structures 
to ensure the response to flood events is more effective. An example of this was seen in Ayutthaya, Thailand, 
where Ng ( 2016) observed that an ineffective, reactionary response by the regional government to extensive 
flooding in 2011 led to further decentralization of flood governance to the local level. Nevertheless, while 
there is broad agreement that decentralization in disaster risk management has the potential to be a positive 
step (Ziervogel et al.,  2016), it can only be effective if the resulting governance structures have the capacity 
and financial resources to exercise power (Adelekan et al., 2015; Garschagen,  2016; van Voorst, 2016). More-
over, while neighborhood and household-level adaptation measures may provide some benefit residents of 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
4 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 5]]
Water Resources Research
informal settlements (Amoako,  2018), they do not address the systemic causes of elevated flood risk (Dod -
man et al.,  2019; Douglas,  2017).
Many attempts to manage the process of urban growth may exacerbate flood risk for the poor (Pelling & 
Garschagen,  2019; Weinstein et al.,  2019). Rapid urbanization in Asia, Africa and Latin America has led 
to the resurgence of new towns as a planning strategy to manage urban growth and alleviate pressure on 
municipal services (Ríos,  2015; Rumbach,  2014). While such towns offer several advantages to planning 
authorities, they are often situated on marginal, hazard-prone land. In Kolkata, India, Salt Lake has under-
gone extensive development since the 1970s to transform a former swamp into a residential neighborhood 
with high-quality housing and flood protection infrastructure (Rumbach,  2017). However, those who serve 
the wealthy residents of Salt Lake, unable to afford housing in the planned settlement and lacking access 
to suitable public transport, instead live on the outskirts of the new development in informal settlements 
where flooding and waterlogging is common (Rumbach,  2017). A similar phenomenon is observed in Bue-
nos Aires, where urban policies skewed toward private interests have resulted in flood risk management ac-
tivities which aim to raise the value of land for the construction of gated communities, forcing the informal 
communities which previously occupied the land to move to ever more hazardous locations (Ríos,  2015). 
Facing rapid urbanization, natural hazards and the effects of climate change, planning authorities and 
government agencies are increasingly moving people away from hazardous locations (Johnson, 2018). How-
ever, even when resettlement is successful at reducing flood risk, it may not succeed in the wider aim of 
reducing poverty (Jain & Bazaz, 2020; Mitra et al.,  2017), leading many development experts to warn against 
resettlement for urban disaster risk reduction in all but the most extreme cases (Johnson,  2018). Yet this 
advice often conflicts with the development priorities of national and municipal governments who are keen 
to attract foreign investment in their cities (Watson,  2014).
From the above discussion, we identify some key themes relating to flood risk management and inequality 
in the context of rapidly urbanizing cities. Driven by a need to escape poverty, residents of informal settle -
ments are typically prepared to accept a greater amount of risk in order to access economic opportunities, 
leading to settlements which are highly exposed to flooding and other hazards. The response of city author-
ities in relation to flood risk management in these locations falls on a continuum between ignorance and 
hostility. On the one hand, hostile governments pursue policies such as forcible evictions and resettlements 
that erode social capital and may only succeed in displacing inhabitants to more hazardous locations. Con-
versely, ignorance of informal settlements leads to inadequate infrastructure and services, insecure tenure, 
and an inability to enact positive change. These actions are intrinsically linked with urban planning agen -
das. Despite inadequate planning responses to the elevated flood risk, residents of informal settlements are 
capable of adaptation and mitigation activities to reduce flood risk to levels which are tolerable at the com-
munity level. In the following section, we translate these observations into a quantitative modeling frame -
work to simulate the co-evolution of flood risk in formal and informal communities, to further understand 
the impact of flood risk management on social inequality.
3. Conceptual Model
The starting point for our conceptual model is that presented by Di Baldassarre et al. ( 2013). This mod -
el considers a homogeneous society that begins to develop a flood prone region to exploit the economic 
benefits associated with living close to the river. The growth of the society is suddenly curtailed by the 
occurrence of a flood event, resulting in an increased awareness within the community of the flood risk. 
This gives rise to a flood risk management response by the society, which comprises either the construction 
of physical protection infrastructure (“technological society”), or moving away from the floodplain (“green 
society”). The response of the society causes feedbacks to the rest of the system which determine the future 
flood risk. For the green society, moving away from the floodplain reduces its exposure to catastrophic flood-
ing (the “adaptation effect”), but causes a decline in the rate of economic growth as it can no longer fully 
exploit the benefits of being close to the river. In the technological society, the capital investment required 
to build flood protection immediately depletes the resources of the society. Meanwhile the flood protection 
itself may increase the magnitude of flood peaks by changing the flood attenuation and conveyancing prop-
erties of the river system (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2009; Heine & Pinter,  2012; Remo et al.,  2012). Thus, while 
the flood protection reduces the number of flood events the society experiences, it also results in the decay 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
5 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 6]]
Water Resources Research
of flood risk awareness, inducing a gradual shift toward the river to take advantage of the economic benefits. 
Eventually, a flood event occurs which exceeds the current protection level, causing the society to suffer 
catastrophic damage (the “levee effect”).
To explore the impact of flood risk management on social inequality we have adapted the conceptualiza -
tion of Di Baldassarre et al. ( 2013) to consider a stratified society consisting of planned and unplanned 
settlements, with varying levels of exposure and vulnerability to a flood hazard, different levels of risk tol -
erance, and different constraints on flood risk management (Figure  1). We chose this version of the model, 
as opposed to its successor (i.e., Di Baldassarre et al.,  2015), due to its use of economic prosperity as the 
main state variable to represent the impacts of flooding on society. This enabled us to effectively represent 
disparities in economic opportunities between formal and informal communities. In addition, the inclu -
sion of a state variable to represent the distance from the flood plain allows us to parameterize the model 
such that disparities in the level of tolerable risk could be taken into account. In contrast, the later version 
effectively replaces the terms representing wealth and distance with population density. While this confers 
some advantages and results in a simpler model structure, without substantial modifications we found it to 
be insufficient for our purposes.
In our model, we conceptualize a city authority which is responsible for flood risk management in the 
planned settlement, but which must also decide how to manage flood risk in the unplanned settlement 
where the exposure and vulnerability of residents to flooding is greater. We link the two communities 
through a society awareness term, which conceptualizes the level of awareness of the planned settlement 
toward the plight of residents in the unplanned settlement. Based on this, the planned settlement—through 
the city authority—may choose to share a proportion of its wealth and power with the unplanned settle -
ment, enabling it to recover from flood events and potentially install flood protection. The model equations 
outlined below are based on those presented in Viglione et al. ( 2014), who expressed the original model 
equations of Di Baldassarre et al. ( 2013) in nondimensional form.
3.1. Hydrological Forcing
The model is driven by a time series of peak-over threshold of natural high water levels, W(t), which is rep-
resented as a marked point process in which the number of flood events per unit time is assumed to follow 
a Poisson distribution (Viglione et al.,  2014). Time is scaled by the mean time between flood events such 
that it becomes nondimensional. Thus, for t > 0, the number of flood events in the interval 
[0, ]t  follows a 
Poisson distribution with mean equal to t, and the sequence of times between flood events is expressed as

  1. tPT t e
 (1)
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
6 of 24
Figure 1. Schematic representation of stratified society, in which part of the society benefits from flood protection 
while another part does not (adapted from Di Baldassarre et al.,  2015).
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 7]]
Water Resources Research
The magnitude of the flood peaks is modeled as a generalized Pareto distribution with minimum equal to 
zero and unit mean, such that



    
1
11 1PW w w
 (2)
where θ is the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution. As in Viglione et al. ( 2014), we set θ = 0.28 such 
that the modeled high water levels cannot exceed 4.57 in nondimensional form.
3.2. Coupled Human-Flood System
We model the settlements as separate human-flood systems, which are dynamically linked through a wealth 
redistribution term. Each system is parameterized separately according to its assumed physical and soci -
oeconomic characteristics. The dynamic human-flood system is modeled with five differential equations:
dG
dt D G T t FG R G
dD
dt M D
EE
P
     
 




 

13  () ( )Economy a

  
 



G
dH
dt tR H
dM
dt t
T
Politics b
Technology c
()
() ( )
()
3
3
  
  






  
SM
dM
dt tS M
S
S


Community d
Society e
()
() ( )
3
3








 
As in the notation adopted elsewhere, model variables are capitalized (for clarity, we do not explicitly show 
that these vary in time t—for example, G could be written G(t)), and parameters are denoted using Greek 
letters. The expression 
Δ () t  is a non-periodic Dirac comb which is always zero except when flooding 
occurs (ϒ( t) = 0), at which point it has a value of + ∞ with unit integral. Model variables change in time, and 
are computed separately for each settlement included in the simulation. The main difference between the 
above set of equations and those described by Di Baldassarre et al. ( 2013) is the reformulation of the Society 
equation to account for the awareness of communities to flooding occurring in other parts of the city, and 
the addition of a Community equation, which models the awareness of communities to flooding in their 
own neighborhood. These will be explained further in due course.
The variation in wealth, G, as the settlement experiences and responds to flooding is modeled using Equa -
tion  3a—the Economy equation. The key departure from the definition included in Viglione et al. ( 2014) is 
the addition of a wealth redistribution variable, T, which represents the transfer of wealth from the planned 
settlement to the unplanned settlement:
  T G GM
 (4)
where 
G  is the mean wealth across all settlements, M′ is the awareness of flood events which occur else -
where, and τ is a parameter which represents the maximum extent by which the wealth gap may be closed 
following a flood event. For example, if M′ = 1 and τ = 1, wealth will be redistributed such that there is total 
equality in wealth. Besides wealth redistribution, Equation 3a states that the variation in wealth is driven on 
the one hand by economic growth (
 1E DG ), and on the other hand by the shock of experiencing flood-
ing, causing economic damage (FG) and potentially resulting in capital expenditure on flood protection 
infrastructure (
 E RG ). Parameter γE is the unit cost of installing flood protection infrastructure. Economic 
growth is equal to the maximum economic growth rate experienced at the riverfront ( ρE), inversely scaled 
by the distance from the riverfront and multiplied by the current wealth.
The damage experienced by the settlement as a result of high water levels, W(t), is represented by the varia-
ble F, which varies between zero (no damage) and one (complete destruction), and is calculated as
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
7 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 8]]
Water Resources Research

 
 


   

1 , if
0, otherwise.
WH H
DH He W HHF
 (5)
This formulation implies that flood damage depends on model state variables representing the current 
height of flood protection, H (H−  denotes the height of flood protection immediately prior to a flood event), 
and the distance from the riverfront, D. Parameter ξH controls the extent to which the water level increas -
es following an increase in the height of the levee. In the original conceptualization of Di Baldassarre 
et al. ( 2013), parameter αH was related to the slope of the floodplain and determined the reduction in ex -
pected damage as a society moved further away from the river. Here, as in other applications of the original 
model (Ciullo et al.,  2017; Di Baldassarre et al.,  2015), we apply a broader definition of this parameter to 
include aspects of the built environment that influence people's vulnerability to flooding, such as the effec-
tiveness of drainage infrastructure and the quality of housing (Amoako,  2018).
The increase in the level of flood protection (e.g., raising levees) following a flood event is modeled as
R
W HH F
FG R G
G FG R G
TH
E
E

 




 
 


,
,
if
and
and
ot
0
0h herwise.








 (6)
After flooding occurs (F > 0), the community makes a decision about whether or not to increase the level 
of flood protection by evaluating the cost of installing protection (
 E RG ) against the flood damage which 
has just been experienced (
  EFG R G ), and their available resources (G− − FG− ). The amount by which 
the protection level is increased is the difference between previous high water level and the increase in flood 
peak induced by the structure (W +  ξHH− ), and the level of protection immediately prior to the flood event 
(H− ). Parameter ϵT is a safety factor which is used to control the extent to which the flood protection level is 
increased above the previous high water level.
The change in distance between the settlement and the riverfront over time is modeled using Equation  3b, 
which is referred to as the Politics equation. The rate of change is driven by the economic incentives to 
move away from the floodplain, considering both the expected damages from future flood events and the 
opportunities for economic growth, as well as the ability of the settlement to move away. Awareness of flood 
risk, M, plays an important role in the calculation: all else being equal, higher levels of awareness increase 
the rate at which the settlement moves away from the riverbank. However, the influence of flood aware -
ness on the rate of change is offset by the potential economic benefits of living closer to the river (− D/λP). 
Parameter λP represents the tradeoff between the desire to maximize economic growth by living as close as 
possible to the river, against the desire to move away from the riverbank to limit future exposure to flood 
events. In the original formulation, it represented the critical distance beyond which the community could 
not grow (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2013). Hence, its inverse (i.e., 1/λP) is indicative of the amount of risk which 
the community is willing to endure in order to benefit from opportunities for economic growth (Viglione 
et al.,  2014). The last term in Equation  3b (
 / G ) defines the rate at which settlements can shift their 
center of mass to be closer or further away from the riverfront. This is assumed to be inversely proportional 
to the representative length of the settlement (
G ), reflecting that larger settlements tend to be harder to 
move than smaller settlements.
The change in the level of flood protection over time is modeled with Equation  3c, which is called the 
Technology equation. It includes terms that define the installation of flood protection (
Δ () tR ), which is 
governed by the output of Equation  6, and the decline in the level of flood protection (κHH), where κH is the 
rate of decay. The level of flood protection is only increased immediately following a flood event, which is 
modeled by the Dirac comb function.
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
8 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 9]]
Water Resources Research
The variation in community awareness of flood risk over time is repre -
sented by Equation  3d, or the Community equation. Note that we use the 
term “society” to the city as a whole—that is, the planned and informal 
communities together—while “community” is used to refer to the set -
tlements individually. The formulation of Equation  3d is comparable to 
Equation  3c, as it consists of terms describing the level of community 
shock immediately following a flood event (
Δ () tS ), and the decline of 
flood risk awareness over time (μSM), which similarly depends on a rate 
parameter, μS. The shock magnitude varies between zero and one and is 
closely related to the relative damages of flood events. It is modeled as
  

, if 0
, otherwise.
S FR
S F
 (7)
After a flood event, the shock magnitude is reduced if additional pro -
tection measures are installed (i.e., R  >  0), or set equal to the relative 
damage arising from the flood event otherwise. The extent to which the 
shock is dampened by additional flood protection is controlled by parameter αS, which may be interpreted 
as a measure of trust a community places in the protection infrastructure (Viglione et al.,  2014). Hence, 
when α S = 0 the community has complete trust that the protection infrastructure will prevent any future 
flood damage, while for αS = 1 the community maintains its awareness of the flood risk, regardless of the 
presence of additional protection.
Lastly, the variation in society awareness of flood events which occur elsewhere (that is, flood events which 
do not directly affect the residents of the community under consideration) is modeled using Equation  3e. 
It is an analogue of Equation  3d, with M′ representing the memory of flood events which occurred in other 
settlements, and μS′ the rate at which the memory or awareness of these events decays. The level of shock 
S′ associated with these flood events is calculated as
 
 



S FR
F
S ,
,
if
otherwise.
0
 (8)
where αS′ represents the extent to which the shock level is moderated by the installation of flood protection 
in the community which has suffered flooding.
4. Model Application
In the first instance, we use the model to develop a set of system archetypes which quantify four approach-
es to flood risk management and disaster recovery. These are based on the framework of Pelling ( 2020), 
who describes alternative post-disaster development pathways based on the intersection of the SDGs and 
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (“Sendai Framework,” henceforth). We have translated 
these pathways to our model by developing a set of model parameterisations which represent the essential 
characteristics of the accompanying narratives (Pelling,  2020).
According to Pelling ( 2020), the SDGs are characterized by their overarching aim of “leaving no one be -
hind”; a deliberate response to criticism of the previous Millenium Development Goals, which inadvert -
ently encouraged governments to focus on raising those just under arbitrary poverty lines to just above, 
effectively ignoring those in extreme poverty (Pelling & Garschagen,  2019). As a supplementary technical 
agreement to the SDGs, the Sendai Framework rather focuses on specific measures that governments could 
take to reduce risk. It's overarching aim is therefore to “build back better,” and is characterized by a focus 
on efficiency. These twin aims—“build back better” and “leaving no one behind”—and their opposites, 
combine to give four possible scenarios, as shown in Figure  2. A description of each scenario is provided 
in Table  1. For a more detailed description of the four scenarios and additional examples in the context of 
disaster risk management we refer to Pelling ( 2020).
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
9 of 24
Figure 2. The intersection of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals, which are premised on “leaving no-one behind,” and 
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, which advocates to 
“build back better” (adapted from Pelling,  2020).
Eﬃcient and 
equitable
Leave no-one behindLeave the poor behind
Build back be/g425er
Build back worse
Ineﬃcient 
but equitable
Ineﬃcient and 
inequitable
Eﬃcient but 
inequitable
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 10]]
Water Resources Research
While these scenarios are idealized, they provide a useful framework with which to consider the impact 
of flood risk management on social inequality. In the first part of our analysis, we develop a set of model 
parameterisations to represent each of the four scenarios, and use these to simulate the co-evolution of the 
two settlements. We compare the scenarios by looking at the co-evolution of the main state variables in 
each settlement. The evolution of the society as a whole is considered in terms of the combined wealth and 
the Gini coefficient (Gini,  1912), a widely used indicator of inequality which measures the distribution of 
wealth across a population.
The parameter sets corresponding to the four scenarios are shown in Table  2. We consider efficiency solely 
in terms of economic growth, with ρE set to 1 for high efficiency scenarios and 0.5 for low efficiency scenar-
ios. Given that the economic prospects of the unplanned community is contingent upon that of the planned 
community, economic growth is assumed to be consistent across the society. On the other hand, we consider 
equity both in terms of the variation in exposure and vulnerability between planned and unplanned settle-
ments, and the different types of flood risk management which are employed by the two communities. We 
identify two parameters pertaining to urban flood risk which may be expected to vary along lines of wealth 
and power. First, we use parameter αH to account for intracity disparities in the vulnerability of communi -
ties to flooding, taking into account physical and social factors such as the quality of housing, existence of 
drainage infrastructure, and access to healthcare. Second, we use the differential value of λP to account for 
the fact that the urban poor tend to exhibit greater risk-taking behavior with respect to location-based risks 
such as flood risk (e.g., Ezeh et al.,  2017; Olthuis et al.,  2015; van Voorst,  2015), in order to take advantage 
of economic and social opportunities (Ezeh et al.,  2017). This results in the unplanned community tending 
to settle closer to the riverfront where the economic opportunities are greater.
Flood risk management is modeled as a combination of “technological” and “green” measures for reducing 
the risk of flooding (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2013). The tendency toward one or other of these approaches is 
primarily controlled by varying the unit cost of flood protection, γE (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2013), which we 
set to 0.005 for both settlements to denote a primarily “technological” approach to flood risk management 
(Viglione et al.,  2014). The inequality of power between the planned and unplanned settlements is modeled 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
10 of 24
Scenario Description Examples
High efficiency, low equity An approach to risk management which prioritizes the needs of the private sector. 
Reconstruction is efficient, consisting of risk management projects which aim to 
protect high-value assets and raise the economic value of the land (Pelling,  2020). 
Such projects fail to sustain or enhance social equality, either because they do 
not raise the protection level for the urban poor or because, once the protection is 
installed, urban authorities force residents to relocate in order to use the vacated 
land for high-value economic activity.
Buenos Aires, Argentina 
(Ríos,  2015)
Kolkata, India 
(Rumbach,  2014)
Low efficiency, low equity Characteristic of risk management in chaotic situations, such as might be seen 
in conflict-ridden and fragile societies, or societies which are extremely poor 
(Pelling,  2020). It may also describe the situtation where risk governance institutions 
are fragmented and under-resourced, leading to unclear roles and responsibilities 
and inefficient risk management. The result is a vicious cycle which increases the 
vulnerability of the urban poor to a variety of hazards.
Niamey, Niger (Boubacar 
et al.,  2017)
Accra, Ghana (Amoako 
et al.,  2019)
Cape Town, South Africa 
(Ziervogel et al.,  2016)
Low efficiency, high equity Risk management which prioritizes equity without properly considering how to build a 
sustainable economic recovery following disasters. As Pelling ( 2020) points out, this 
is a common outcome when the recovery is led by the humanitarian sector, which 
generally commits to ensuring equitable access to its resources during recovery yet 
lacks the capacity and long-term outlook to initiate a sustainable economic recovery.
Blantyre, Malawi 
(Hendriks & 
Boersma,  2019)
High efficiency, high equity The stated goal of both the Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework: 
disaster risk management which enables equitable and inclusive sustainable 
development.
Nairobi, Kenya (Mitra 
et al.,  2017)
Notes. Examples of each scenario are given. It is important to bear in mind that actual approaches to flood risk management are unique and may include 
elements of each of the four approaches, as well as features not covered by them.
Table 1 
Four Idealized Scenarios of Flood Risk Management, Adapted From Scenarios of Disaster Risk Recovery Outlined By Pelling ( 2020)
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 11]]
Water Resources Research
by varying the safety factor for raising flood protection, ϵT. In the two low equity scenarios we prevent the 
unplanned settlement from installing flood protection by setting ϵT = 0, while in the high equity scenarios 
we set ϵT = 1.1 for both settlements. Another option here would be to set 0  ≤  ϵT  ≤ 1.1 to account for com -
munity-based flood protection measures such as raising homes on stilts (Amoako, 2018). In the high equity 
scenarios we enable wealth redistribution by setting τ = 0.5, which means that when M′ = 1 the society 
commits to reducing the wealth gap by 50%.
In the second stage of the analysis we examine the sensitivity of the model to the differential values of vul -
nerability, αH, and appetite for risk, 1/λP, which are key indicators of inequality. The purpose of this analysis 
is to highlight the effectiveness of potential strategies for flood risk management within each of the system 
archetypes outlined in the first part of the analysis. In each of the scenarios described in Table 2, we vary α H 
such that 2  ≤  αH  ≤ 10, and λP such that 0.3333  ≤  λP  ≤ 2.
5. Results
5.1. System Archetypes
In this part of the analysis, we model the co-evolution of the planned and unplanned settlements for each 
of the four scenarios outlined above, using the corresponding parameter sets shown in Table  2 and one 
possible time series of high water levels. The two low efficiency scenarios result in the long-term decline of 
both planned and unplanned settlements (Figure  3). For the unplanned settlement the decline is initiated 
by the large flood event around t = 20. In the “low efficiency, low equity” scenario this event causes an im -
mediate collapse, while for the corresponding high equity scenario the collapse is the result of a secondary 
flood event which occurs shortly after the initial event. The planned settlement survives these flood events, 
but the damage it experiences triggers a terminal decline in its wealth, which is gradually depleted by suc -
cessive flood events during the period t = [20, 40]. The levee effect is clearly identifiable in the evolution of 
the planned settlement for the period t = [0, 20], during which the planned settlement is able to install flood 
protection in both high and low equity scenarios. However, during the period of no flooding, t = [10, 20], 
the settlement moves closer to the riverfront while the level of protection gradually declines. A subsequent 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
11 of 24
Description
High efficiency Low efficiency
High 
equity
Low 
equity
High 
equity
Low 
equity
ξH Proportion of additional high water due to flood protection 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
αH Inversely related to the vulnerability of human settlement 10 10/5.2 10 10/5.2
ρE Maximum relative growth rate, scaled by rate of flooding 1 1 0.5 0.5
γE Cost for unit height R and width 
G  of flood protection infrastructure 0.005 0.005 0.005 0.005
λP Distance at which people would choose to live bearing in mind previous 
catastrophic flooding, scaled by the distance of no growth
2/0.666 2/0.666 2/0.666 2/0.666
σP Rate at which new properties can be built 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
ϵT Safety factor for flood protection 1.1 1.1/0 1.1 1.1/0
κT Rate of decay of flood protection 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
αS Proportion of shock after flooding if protection installed (community) 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
αS′ Proportion of shock after flooding if protection installed (society) 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
μS Memory loss rate (community) 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.25
μS′ Memory loss rate (society) 10 10 2 2
τ Level of wealth redistribution 0.5 0 0.5 0
Notes. Parameters which are the same across formal and informal settlements are shown as single values, while 
parameters which vary between formal and informal settlements are shown as formal/informal.
Table 2 
Parameter Values for the Four System Archetypes: (a) High Efficiency, High Equity; (b) High Efficiency, Low 
Equity; (c) Low Efficiency, High Equity; (d) Low Efficiency, Low Equity
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 12]]
Water Resources Research
flood event results in a large amount of damage and provokes the rapid migration away from the floodplain, 
leading to a marked decline in the economic growth of the settlement which ultimately causes its demise.
In the high efficiency scenarios both planned and unplanned settlements survive over the simulation peri -
od. In the planned settlement, there is only a marginal difference in the evolution of the various state varia-
bles between the low and high equity scenarios, yet this translates to a large disparity in the corresponding 
variables of the unplanned settlement. In the low equity scenario, the inability of the unplanned settlement 
to install flood protection combined with the high economic imperative to reside near to the riverbank 
leads to frequent flood damage, especially during the interval t = [20, 50]. After a flood event, the commu -
nity initially retreats from the floodplain before quickly returning (Figure  3), driven by the high economic 
incentive to live close to the riverbank. Such behavior may be interpreted as a temporary migration of the 
community away from the flooded region until the floodwater has receded and the necessary repairs made. 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
12 of 24
Figure 3. System behavior for each archetype in Table  2 for one possible time series of high water level: (a) community 
wealth; (b) height of flood protection; (c) distance from the riverbank; (d) relative flood damage. The results are shown 
separately for the planned and informal settlements.
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 13]]
Water Resources Research
It arises because of the higher vulnerability of the unplanned settlement (α H = 5.2) combined with a greater 
tolerance for risk (1/λP = 0.666). Persistent flood damage causes the economic growth of the settlement to 
stagnate, although the high economic growth rate (ρE = 1) ensures it does not fail during the course of the 
simulation. In the high equity scenario, the ability of the unplanned settlement to install flood protection 
means that it experiences sustained economic growth during the simulation, punctuated by losses from 
flood damage. Although both settlements have the same level of flood protection, the relative damages 
experienced by the unplanned settlement are higher due to it having greater vulnerability ( α H = 5.2), and 
higher tolerance of risk (λP = 1).
Flood events at the beginning of the simulation cause inequality to rise in all cases (Figure  4), mainly be-
cause of the disparity in vulnerability and exposure of the two settlements. In the two high equity scenarios, 
inequality decreases during dry periods but rises rapidly after flood events. This is due to the differential 
value of vulnerability ( αH), combined with a greater tolerance of risk among the unplanned community. 
In the latter half of the “high efficiency, high equity” simulation there is a gradual trend of decreasing ine -
quality, which stems from the ability of the unplanned settlement to install flood protection and protect its 
economic growth.
5.2. Sensitivity Analysis
5.2.1. High Efficiency, Low Equity
In this scenario the parameters representing the vulnerability and risk tolerance of the planned settlement 
is fixed ( αH = 10 and λP = 2, respectively), while for the informal settlement they vary ( αH = 4 → 10, and 
λP = 0.3333 → 2). Since in this scenario there is no wealth redistribution (i.e., τ = 0), the two settlements 
evolve independently, with the evolution of the planned settlement the same in each case. At the highest 
levels of vulnerability and risk aversion (αH = 4 and λP = 2), the wealth of the informal settlement is deplet -
ed rapidly as catastrophic flood damage causes the community to move away from flood-prone regions to 
areas which provide less opportunities for economic growth. For the same level of vulnerability but greater 
tolerance of risk (λP = 0.3333), the unplanned community stays close to the floodplain where the potential 
for economic growth is highest. While in some cases this attitude results in economic collapse, it is more 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
13 of 24
Figure 4. Evolution of the Gini coefficient and combined wealth of the planned and informal communities for each of 
the four scenarios depicted in Figure  3.
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 14]]
Water Resources Research
often the case that the community maintains a tenuous existence which is characterized by periods of eco-
nomic growth interspersed with catastrophic flood damage. Accordingly, economic growth is not sustain -
able and the community merely maintains its presence on the floodplain. For high levels of vulnerability 
(e.g., αH  ≤ 6.4), inequality is consistently high, driven by frequent and severe flood damage in the unplanned 
settlement.
As the vulnerability of the informal settlement reduces ( α H ↑) the relative damage of flood events also de -
clines, allowing the community to sustainably accumulate wealth (Figure  5). However, since the relative 
flood damage suffered by the unplanned community is always higher than that of the planned settlement 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
14 of 24
Figure 5. Co-evolution of wealth and social inequality in the planned and informal communities for the “high efficiency, low equity” scenario (Table  2). 
Parameters relating to vulnerability (αH) and risk aversion (λP) in the informal settlement are varied to investigate model sensitivity and represent potential 
policy directions. Model simulations in which there is a large difference in wealth result in high social inequality (high Gini coefficient). In this case, the highest 
social equality is achieved in scenarios when the appetite for risk is high (e.g., λP = 0.3333). However, the large spread in Gini coefficient for these simulations 
indicates that, according to our model, this high-risk approach may exacerbate poverty depending on the evolution of water levels. This outcome is more likely 
with increasing vulnerability (αH ↓).
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 15]]
Water Resources Research
due to a lack of flood protection, inequality increases across all water level time series, albeit at a slower rate 
than for lower levels of vulnerability in the informal settlement.
5.2.2. Low Efficiency, Low Equity
This scenario clearly demonstrates the impact of lower economic growth on the ability of both communi -
ties to cope with flooding (Figure  6). Nevertheless, some similar patterns emerge. To start with, we again 
see a rapid gain in inequality when the vulnerability of the unplanned settlement is high. However, unlike 
in the previous scenario, the settlement typically fails to survive until the end of the simulation, regardless 
of the appetite for risk. This is because the economic gain associated with living close to the floodplain is 
much lower as a result of the lower economic growth ( ρE = 0.5), while the frequency of flooding remains 
the same. As vulnerability reduces (e.g., αH  ≥ 7.6) the range of inequality seen for the highest appetite for 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
15 of 24
Figure 6. Co-evolution of wealth and social inequality for the “low efficiency, low equity” scenario (Table  2). The only difference between this scenario and the 
“high efficiency, low equity” scenario is a lower economic growth rate for both communities. This has a large effect on the evolution of the planned settlement, 
which cannot accumulate enough wealth to develop resilience to flooding. Since it also suppresses the economic benefit of living close to the riverbank, the 
sensitivity of the model to risk aversion (λP) is also reduced. The overall effect is to reduce social inequality but at the expense of economic growth.
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 16]]
Water Resources Research
risk (λP = 0.3333) also increases, reflecting the lower relative damage experienced by the community, and 
consequently its increased ability to recover following flood events, combined with the greater economic 
opportunities afforded by living close to the riverfront.
5.2.3. Low Efficiency, High Equity
Here, the level of disparity in wealth between the two settlements is lower than in the previous scenario 
(Figure  7), driven by a commitment to equity (τ = 0.5). Wealth redistribution has the effect of reducing the 
ability of the planned community to cope with flooding, which fails more frequently than in the “low effi -
ciency, low equity” scenario. In the majority of cases the wealth of both communities decreases over time. 
This inefficiency arises because the wealth which is redistributed to the unplanned community is sufficient 
only to meet the immediate needs of the post-disaster recovery. It may allow the community to continue to 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
16 of 24
Figure 7. Co-evolution of wealth and social inequality for the “low efficiency, high equity” scenario (Table  2). This differs from the “low efficiency, low equity” 
scenario by introducing wealth redistribution (τ = 0.5), which translates to greater levels of social equity across all combinations of vulnerability and risk 
aversion. However, despite a commitment to social equality, low economic growth means that neither community can consistently build resilience to flooding, 
resulting in frequent flood damage and loss of wealth.
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 17]]
Water Resources Research
exist, but in failing to support effective flood risk management it prevents sustainable economic growth, and 
the settlement continues to experience flood damage. At the same time, the resources of the planned set -
tlement are increasingly drained by the combined effect of frequent flood events and wealth redistribution.
5.2.4. High Efficiency, High Equity
Prioritizing equality ( τ = 0.5) and efficiency ( ρE = 1) tends to yield sustained economic growth and low -
er levels of inequality across the two settlements (Figure  8). As in the previous cases, higher vulnerabili -
ty is associated with higher inequality. When high vulnerability is combined with a low appetite for risk 
(e.g., λP  ≥ 1.3333), flood events early in the simulation causes inequality to rise as the differential values 
of αH causes the unplanned community to experience more damage. Across all parameter combinations, 
the highest levels of inequality in this scenario are seen when the risk-taking attitude of the unplanned 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
17 of 24
Figure 8. Co-evolution of wealth and social inequality in planned and informal communities for the “high efficiency, high equity” scenario (Table  2), which 
represents the ideal intersection of the Sustainable Development Goals and the Sendai Framework (Pelling,  2020). Here, the commitment to social equality and 
relatively high economic growth rate means that the development of the society tends to be inclusive and sustainable, with both settlements experiencing less 
flood damage. However, this outcome is only achievable when the vulnerabilty of the informal settlement is low (αH ↑), at moderate levels of risk aversion.
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 18]]
Water Resources Research
community is highest, which results in the settlement experiencing higher relative flood damages than for 
equivalent scenarios with a lower appetite for risk.
The level of wealth redistribution depends not only on the value of τ, but also the awareness of flood events 
which occur elsewhere, M′. The reduction in awareness of these events over time is controlled by parameter 
μS′, where low values translate to a long memory of flood events and high values indicate a short memory. 
As memory fades, so too does the amount of wealth redistribution. Hence, this formulation may be used 
to compare the effect of a city authority which is committed to reducing inequality yet reactionary, versus 
one which is prepared to engage with communities over the longer-term in order to effectively manage the 
flood risk. To further understand the influence of society memory on the model output, we select the set 
of scenarios from Figure  8 for which λP = 0.6667, and construct a set of parameter combinations in which 
μS′ varies from 0 to 10, translating to long and short memory of flood events occurring elsewhere, respec -
tively (Figure  9). Predictably, the highest levels of equality are seen when μS = 0, which effectively means 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
18 of 24
Figure 9. Co-evolution of wealth and inequality in planned and informal communities for the “high efficiency, high equity” scenario, with fixed appetite 
for risk (λP = 0.6667) and the society awareness of flooding is varied. The second row of this plot is the same as that in of Figure  8. Decreasing memory 
loss rate (μS′ ↓) increases the tendency toward social equity as the commitment to equality remains high throughout the simulation.
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 19]]
Water Resources Research
that awareness of flooding in other parts of the city does not diminish over time. However, as vulnerability 
increases (αH ↓) the variability in social inequality also increases, suggesting that the informal community 
experiences frequent damage which is repaired at the expense of the planned community.
6. Discussion
We have adapted the socio-hydrological model of Di Baldassarre et al. ( 2013) and Viglione et al. ( 2014) to 
simulate the floodplain dynamics of a stratified urban society and investigate the impact of various flood 
risk management strategies on inequality and flood risk. While the model application is hypothetical, the 
system dynamics it reveals are consistent with observations from flood-prone settlements around the world 
(Table  1).
The modeling results reveal potential pathways to reduce flood risk in informal settlements. The sensitivity 
analysis for the “high efficiency, low equity” scenario (Figure  5 suggests that investing in measures to re -
duce vulnerability to flooding may have a large effect on the survival and economic prosperity of informal 
communities. When the risk threshold is high (e.g., λP = 0.3333), reducing vulnerability ( αH ↑) generally re-
sults in substantial increases in wealth accumulation for the unplanned settlement and a corresponding de-
crease in social inequality. Although in this case the unplanned community gravitates toward the riverbank 
despite the inability to install flood protection (ϵT = 0), reducing vulnerability tends to have a positive effect 
on evolution of the settlement. Conversely, policies which either deliberately or inadvertently increase vul-
nerability are likely to increase social inequality. Again, this phenomenon is often seen in private-sector 
led urban development such as in Buenos Aires (Ríos,  2015). On the other hand, reducing the threshold of 
tolerable risk (λP ↓) impedes the economic growth of the settlement and increases social inequality, high -
lighting the fact that marginalized communities must take far greater risks than wealthier communities in 
order to access economic opportunities.
These outcomes imply two broad policy directions for reducing urban flood risk in informal settlements. 
On the one hand, policymakers can focus on reducing the vulnerability of existing informal settlements, 
which in some cases may have a large positive impact on the ability of communities to withstand flooding 
and grow sustainably (Olthuis et al.,  2015). This is the motivation behind many slum upgrading projects, 
which have successfully reduced flood risk in cities such as Nairobi (Mitra et al.,  2017). According to Mitra 
et al. ( 2017), successful upgrading projects build the social contract between informal communities and 
government, enhance social capital within and between social groups, and adopt a multi-sectoral approach 
to enhancing the urban environment. On the other hand, Olthuis et al. ( 2015) criticizes many upgrading 
projects for adopting generic measures which fail to properly consider the specific characteristics of settle -
ments, leading to missed opportunities for reducing flood risk and measures which soon become obselete, 
contributing to the perception of informal settlements as temporary. As slum upgrading implies that com -
munities continue to reside in the same place, it has parallels with the “technological” approach to flood 
risk management outlined by Di Baldassarre et al. ( 2013). However, while some upgrading approaches may 
be supplemented with large-scale flood protection infrastructure (Olthuis et al.,  2015), such measures are 
not always practicable due to the close proximity of many informal settlements to the river, as well as the 
considerable expense (Mulligan et al.,  2016). Rather, specific interventions to reduce flood risk may include 
raising homes on stilts, establishing safe havens, and developing community-based early warning systems 
(Amoako,  2018).
Meanwhile, policies can facilitate the development of less hazardous land which does not deprive residents 
of economic opportunities and essential services (e.g., schools, health facilities). This option may be need to 
be accompanied by efforts to decouple economic opportunity from the proximity to flood hazards (Di Bal -
dassarre et al.,  2019). For example, the provision of low-cost transport may allow people to access jobs while 
living further afield, potentially reducing the need to live in hazardous locations (Dodman et al., 2017). One 
course of action associated with these activities is to relocate existing informal settlements to the newly 
developed land (Johnson,  2018). However, despite the ostensible parsimony of relocation and resettlement 
schemes, several documented policy cases show the importance of ensuring that migration away from the 
floodplain is a carefully managed process which does not inadvertently increase poverty and inequality (Jain 
& Bazaz,  2020). Forcible evictions, which are commonly associated with the “high efficiency, low equity” 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
19 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 20]]
Water Resources Research
paradigm described above (e.g., Amoako,  2016; Watson,  2014), violate human dignity and may not work as 
intended (Amoako & Inkoom,  2018; Jain & Bazaz,  2020). The failure of many such programs emphasizes 
the interconnected nature of urban systems and the myriad factors which determine flood risk (Amoako 
et al.,  2019), leading many urban development experts to suggest that these policies should be considered 
only as a last resort (Jain & Bazaz,  2020; Johnson,  2018; Satterthwaite,  2001). Overall, it is imperative to de-
velop risk management policies in partnership with communities (Mitra et al.,  2017), which is identified as 
a hallmark of the “high efficiency, high equity” ideal to which the SDGs and the Sendai Framework aspire 
(Pelling,  2020). The insecure tenure status of many informal settlements is a key impediment to meaningful 
dialogue with city authorities (Dodman et al.,  2017; Mulligan et al.,  2016), leading Olthuis et al. ( 2015) to 
argue that an essential step toward improving the lives of inhabitants of informal settlements is to accept 
informal settlements as a permanent feature of the urban landscape.
The difference in outcomes between the two high equity scenarios shows that economic prosperity is vital 
to ensure recovery from natural hazards is sustainable. However, as the “high efficiency, low equity” sce -
nario demonstrates, prosperity in one section of society does not necessarily translate to prosperity in other 
sections. This illustrates the need for policies which actively aim to reduce social inequality across the var -
ious facets of flood risk. Flood risk reduction requires long-term planning, coordination, and investment at 
various levels of governance, and the involvement of civil society (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2014), all of which 
are severely hampered by structural inequality (Mitra et al.,  2017). In the scenarios without wealth redis -
tribution the existence of the unplanned settlement is tenuous and frequently enters a period of long-term 
decline. This is consistent with the vicious cycle identified by Islam and Winkel ( 2017), whereby persistent 
flooding disproportionately impacts poorer residents and deepens inequality. However, wealth redistribu -
tion on its own is not enough: there is also a need to encourage sustainable economic growth across so -
ciety. This is shown by the results for the “low efficiency, high equity” scenario (Figure  7), where despite 
higher levels of equity the inefficient use of available resources means that both planned and unplanned 
suffer economic decline as a result of repeated flood events. While undoubtedly the private sector has a 
critical role to play in driving economic growth (Watson,  2014), it is important that appropriate govern -
ance structures are in place to ensure that private-sector led development is equitable, both in terms of the 
development process (e.g., purchasing of land, gaining planning permission, construction), and outcomes 
(Pelling,  2020). Whether this can be achieved within the prevailing neoliberal system is the subject of much 
debate (Gillespie,  2016).
The model we have developed has some important limitations. It currently treats the vulnerability and 
threshold of tolerable risk of the communities as static properties, whereas in reality both characteristics 
may vary in relation to other state variables. Furthermore, the model does not account for the effect of 
conflict on flood risk. As we have mentioned previously, many informal communities live in conflict with 
the city authorities and formal communities (van Voorst,  2016), which may arise because of the threat of 
forcible evictions from hazardous areas, or a political tradition of blaming informal communities for in -
creasing the flood hazard (van Voorst,  2015). Similarly, we do not consider the role of democratic account-
ability in determining flood risk management strategies. This is highly relevant to informal settlements, 
where residents may be disenfranchized, or targeted by populist policies which rarely come to fruition 
(e.g., Amoako & Frimpong Boamah,  2015), eroding confidence in the social contract (Mitra et al.,  2017). 
Here, social capital theory may provide a useful framework for including these facets of disaster resilience 
(Aldrich,  2012). Furthermore, there is a need for models to consider the role of institutions in shaping urban 
flood risk and enacting flood risk management strategies (Brelsford et al.,  2020). We echo previous calls 
for socio-hydrological researchers to engage with social scientists to include these important processes in 
our models (Brelsford et al.,  2020; Di Baldassarre et al.,  2019). Another potential development would be to 
include the provision of foreign aid to disaster risk reduction efforts, which often underpins investment in 
risk reduction infrastructure in developing countries (Dodman et al.,  2017). As Pelling ( 2020) note, the “low 
efficiency, high equity” scenario is often associated with disaster risk management and recovery which is 
led by aid agencies, since these organizations often lack the capacity and long-term outlook to stimulate sus-
tainable economic development. Addressing these limitations will enable a more complete understanding 
of the dynamic relationship between urban flood risk management and social inequality.
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
20 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 21]]
Water Resources Research
Despite its shortcomings, our model lays the groundwork for more complex models which could provide a 
more detailed representation of coupled human-flood systems. As neither planned nor unplanned settle -
ments are monolithic, further work needs to consider the heterogeneities which exist within these commu-
nities. These may present over the spatial dimension, but could also exist along lines of gender, age, and 
disability, for example. One possible approach to incorporate additional complexity is to use agent-based 
modeling, which would allow a more nuanced representation of the interactions between various actors 
within the system. The explicit representation of space in agent-based models would enable a better rep -
resentation of floodplain hydrology, permitting a more rigorous assessment of the important spatial effects, 
such as the degree of co-benefits experienced from flood protection or, conversely, the transfer of flood risk 
from one area to another as a result of structural measures (Douglas, 2017). However, given their significant 
data requirements, parameterizing this class of model is non-trivial (Blair & Buytaert,  2016), reinforcing 
the importance of collecting relevant data on physical and socioeconomic phenomena to support future 
socio-hydrological research.
Urban socio-hydrology takes a water-centred view of risk which, to date, has tended to focus on large flood 
events (Di Baldassarre et al.,  2013). This represents a weakness of applying socio-hydrology to understand 
risk in cities, where hazards exist on a spectrum, from everyday hazards, small disasters, and catastrophic 
events (Adelekan et al.,  2015). It is often those living informally who are most vulnerable to small-scale 
events including localized floods, water shortages, infectious diseases, building collapse, fires and road traf-
fic accidents, among many others (Dodman et al.,  2017). The agglomeration of interrelated risks in urban 
areas demands policy responses that exploit opportunities for synergies and coherence across sectors (Adel-
ekan et al.,  2015; Mitra et al.,  2017), as espoused by SDG Target 17.14, to “enhance policy coherence for sus-
tainable development” (United Nations, 2015). By taking a holistic view of coupled human-natural systems, 
socio-hydrology is well placed to identify these opportunities. Toward this goal, we make three suggestions 
for future socio-hydrological research to make a meaningful contribution to the Sustainable Development 
Goals. First, research must recognize social inequality as a fundamental concern of sustainable develop -
ment, and seek to increase knowledge about the way that human-water systems may influence social jus -
tice. As we have shown, reducing inequality in cities requires proactive measures which acknowledge the 
potential of urban development to establish or reinforce vicious cycles that exacerbate poverty. We also 
suggest that research efforts on water-related risks in cities need to be placed in the broader context of urban 
disaster risk reduction and urban development. Cities are places of multiple interacting hazards (Dodman 
et al.,  2017), as well as centers which which provide myriad opportunities for addressing environmental 
and social challenges (Dodman et al.,  2017; Ezzati et al.,  2018). Lastly, recognizing that urban flooding and 
other water crises arise from failures of governance, future work on urban flood risk management should 
aim to contribute to discourse about reforms to urban governance and planning systems for urban disaster 
risk reduction and sustainable development.
7. Conclusion
In this study, we have put forward a system dynamics model to simulate interactions and feedbacks between 
urban flood risk management and social inequality in rapidly urbanizing cities. Our analysis demonstrates 
the importance of understanding social heterogeneities in managing urban flood risk, and highlights the 
potential for unforeseen policy outcomes which exacerbate inequality and poverty. Two overlapping policy 
approaches for successfully managing urban flood risk are apparent. First, our model supports the notion 
that reducing the vulnerability of informal communities through measures associated with slum upgrading 
projects can in some cases reduce flood risk to a level which is tolerable to the residents. Examples from 
cities around the world show that accepting the permanence of informal settlements and, in doing so, 
providing secure tenure to residents is an essential part of this approach. At the same time, our analysis 
suggests that city authorities must take proactive measures to ensure that future urbanization occurs on less 
hazardous land, taking into account the social and economic needs of future residents. While in some cases 
this approach may precipitate the relocation of existing informal settlements located in areas perceived to 
be high risk, such efforts should only be done in consultation with the residents of informal communities.
In line with previous socio-hydrological models, our model is a mathematical representation of idealized 
facts which has been developed to examine the interactions and feedbacks between system components (Di 
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
21 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 22]]
Water Resources Research
Baldassarre et al.,  2013,  2015). Further model development is needed to include some potentially important 
processes and feedbacks in coupled human-flood systems which are relevant to social inequality. An out -
standing task is to promote the static parameters representing vulnerability and risk tolerance to dynamic 
state variables. Additional complexity may be included by integrating our model into an agent-based mode-
ling framework. Nevertheless, our work provides an important first step toward a quantitative understand-
ing of the role of urban flood risk management on social inequality. Our results show that different flood 
risk management approaches can have large positive and negative impacts on marginalized communities, 
reinforcing the need for research which seeks to understand the dynamic relationship between water man-
agement and inclusive sustainable development.
Data Availability Statement
The model implementation and data are available online (http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4085200).
References
Adelekan, I., Johnson, C., Manda, M., Matyas, D., Mberu, B., Parnell, S., et al. (2015). Disaster risk and its reduction: An agenda for urban 
Africa. International Development Planning Review, 37(1), 33–43. https://doi.org/10.3828/idpr.2015.4
Ahern, M., Kovats, R. S., Wilkinson, P., Few, R., & Matthies, F. (2005). Global health impacts of floods: Epidemiologic evidence. Epidemi-
ologic Reviews, 27(1), 36–46. https://doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxi004
Aldrich, D. P. (2012). Building resilience: Social capital in post-disaster recovery . The University of Chicago Press. https://doi.org/10.7208/
chicago/9780226012896.001.0001
Amoako, C. (2016). Brutal presence or convenient absence: The role of the state in the politics of flooding in informal Accra, Ghana. Geofo-
rum, 77, 5–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2016.10.003
Amoako, C. (2018). Emerging grassroots resilience and flood responses in informal settlements in Accra, Ghana. GeoJournal, 83(5), 949–
965. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-017-9807-6
Amoako, C., Cobbinah, P. B., & Mensah Darkwah, R. (2019). Complex twist of fate: The geopolitics of flood management regimes in Accra, 
Ghana. Cities, 89, 209–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2019.02.006
Amoako, C., & Frimpong Boamah, E. (2015). The three-dimensional causes of flooding in Accra, Ghana. International Journal of Urban 
Sustainable Development, 7(1), 109–129. https://doi.org/10.1080/19463138.2014.984720
Amoako, C., & Inkoom, D. K. B. (2018). The production of flood vulnerability in Accra, Ghana: Re-thinking flooding and informal urban-
isation. Urban Studies, 55(13), 2903–2922. https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098016686526
Blair, P., & Buytaert, W. (2016). Socio-hydrological modelling: A review asking “why, what and how?” Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 
20(1), 443–478. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-20-443-2016
Bleischwitz, R., Spataru, C., VanDeveer, S. D., Obersteiner, M., van der Voet, E., Johnson, C., et  al. (2018). Resource nexus perspec -
tives towards the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Nature Sustainability , 1(12), 737–743. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41893-018-0173-2
Boubacar, S., Pelling, M., Barcena, A., & Montandon, R. (2017). The erosive effects of small disasters on household absorptive capacity in 
Niamey: A nested HEA approach. Environment and Urbanization, 29(1), 33–50. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247816685515
Brelsford, C., Dumas, M., Schlager, E., Dermody, B. J., Aiuvalasit, M., Allen-Dumas, M. R., et al. (2020). Developing a sustainability science 
approach for water systems. Ecology and Society, 25(2), art23. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-11515-250223
Bull-Kamanga, L., Diagne, K., Lavell, A., Leon, E., Lerise, F., MacGregor, H., & Yitambe, A. (2003). From everyday hazards to disasters: The 
accumulation of risk in urban areas (Vol. 12).
Ciullo, A., Viglione, A., Castellarin, A., Crisci, M., & Di Baldassarre, G. (2017). Socio-hydrological modelling of flood-risk dynamics: Com-
paring the resilience of green and technological systems. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 62(6), 880–891. https://doi.org/10.1080/02626
667.2016.1273527
Cobbinah, P. B., & Darkwah, R. M. (2017). Urban planning and politics in Ghana. GeoJournal, 82(6), 1229–1245. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10708-016-9750-y
Dai, W., Kaminga, A. C., Tan, H., Wang, J., Lai, Z., Wu, X., & Liu, A. (2017). Long-term psychological outcomes of flood survivors of hard-
hit areas of the 1998 Dongting Lake flood in China: Prevalence and risk factors. PloS One, 14.
Di Baldassarre, G., Castellarin, A., & Brath, A. (2009). Analysis of the effects of levee heightening on flood propagation: Example of the 
River Po, Italy. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 54(6), 1007–1017. https://doi.org/10.1623/hysj.54.6.1007
Di Baldassarre, G., Kemerink, J. S., Kooy, M., & Brandimarte, L. (2014). Floods and societies: The spatial distribution of water-related 
disaster risk and its dynamics. WIREs Water, 1(2), 133–139. https://doi.org/10.1002/wat2.1015
Di Baldassarre, G., Montanari, A., Lins, H., Koutsoyiannis, D., Brandimarte, L., & Blöschl, G. (2010). Flood fatalities in Africa: From diag-
nosis to mitigation. Geophysical Research Letters, 37(22). https://doi.org/10.1029/2010GL045467
Di Baldassarre, G., Sivapalan, M., Rusca, M., Cudennec, C., Garcia, M., Kreibich, H., et al. (2019). Sociohydrology: Scientific challenges 
in addressing the sustainable development goals. Water Resources Research, 55(8), 6327–6355. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018WR023901
Di Baldassarre, G., Viglione, A., Carr, G., Kuil, L., Salinas, J. L., & Blöschl, G. (2013). Socio-hydrology: Conceptualising human-flood inter-
actions. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 17(8), 3295–3303. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-17-3295-2013
Di Baldassarre, G., Viglione, A., Carr, G., Kuil, L., Yan, K., Brandimarte, L., & Blöschl, G. (2015). Debates-perspectives on socio-hy -
drology: Capturing feedbacks between physical and social processes. Water Resources Research , 51(6), 4770–4781. https://doi.
org/10.1002/2014WR016416
Dodman, D., Archer, D., & Satterthwaite, D. (2019). Editorial: Responding to climate change in contexts of urban poverty and informality. 
Environment and Urbanization, 31(1), 3–12. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247819830004
Dodman, D., Leck, H., Rusca, M., & Colenbrander, S. (2017). African urbanisation and urbanism: Implications for risk accumulation and 
reduction. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 26, 7–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.06.029
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
22 of 24
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Pathways 
to Equitable Healthy Cities grant from 
the Wellcome Trust [209376/Z/17/Z], 
the TWIGA project of the European 
Union Horizon 2020 Research and In-
novation programme [776691], and the 
Integrated Research into Utility Services 
and Improving the Urban Environment 
(InRUE) project of the Royal Academy 
of Engineering's Higher Education 
Partnerships in Sub Saharan Africa 
programme [HEPSSA1921/3/74].
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 23]]
Water Resources Research
Dottori, F., Szewczyk, W., Ciscar, J.-C., Zhao, F., Alfieri, L., Hirabayashi, Y., et al. (2018). Increased human and economic losses from river 
flooding with anthropogenic warming. Nature Climate Change, 8(9), 781–786. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0257-z
Douglas, I. (2017). Flooding in African cities, scales of causes, teleconnections, risks, vulnerability and impacts. International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 26, 34–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.09.024
Douglas, I., Alam, K., Maghenda, M., Mcdonnell, Y., Mclean, L., & Campbell, J. (2008). Unjust waters: Climate change, flooding and the 
urban poor in Africa. Environment and Urbanization, 20(1), 187–205. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247808089156
Enqvist, J. P., & Ziervogel, G. (2019). Water governance and justice in Cape Town: An overview. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews, 6, e1354. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/wat2.1354
Ezeh, A., Oyebode, O., Satterthwaite, D., Chen, Y.-F., Ndugwa, R., Sartori, J., et al. (2017). The history, geography, and sociology of slums 
and the health problems of people who live in slums. The Lancet, 389(10068), 547–558. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31650-6
Ezzati, M., Webster, C. J., Doyle, Y. G., Rashid, S., Owusu, G., & Leung, G. M. (2018). Cities for global health. BMJ, 363, k3794. https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmj.k3794
Few, R. (2003). Flooding, vulnerability and coping strategies: Local responses to a global threat. Progress in Development Studies , 3(1), 
43–58. https://doi.org/10.1191/1464993403ps049ra
Filho, W. L., Balogun, A.-L., Ayal, D. Y., Bethurem, E. M., Murambadoro, M., Mambo, J., et al. (2018). Strengthening climate change adap-
tation capacity in Africa—Case studies from six major African cities and policy implications. Environmental Science & Policy, 86, 29–37. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2018.05.004
Garcia, M., Portney, K., & Islam, S. (2016). A question driven socio-hydrological modeling process. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 
20(1), 73–92. https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-20-73-2016
Garschagen, M. (2016). Decentralizing urban disaster risk management in a centralized system? Agendas, actors and contentions in Viet-
nam. Habitat International, 52, 43–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2015.08.030
Gillespie, T. (2016). Accumulation by urban dispossession: Struggles over urban space in Accra, Ghana. Transactions of the Institute of 
British Geographers, 41(1), 66–77. https://doi.org/10.1111/tran.12105
Gini, C. (1912). Variabilità e mutuabilità. C. Cuppini.
Gran Castro, J. A., & Ramos De Robles, S. L. (2019). Climate change and flood risk: Vulnerability assessment in an urban poor community 
in Mexico. Environment and Urbanization, 31(1), 75–92. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247819827850
Grasham, C. F., Korzenevica, M., & Charles, K. J. (2019). On considering climate resilience in urban water security: A review of the vulner-
ability of the urban poor in sub-Saharan Africa. WIREs Water, 6(3), e1344. https://doi.org/10.1002/wat2.1344
Heine, R. A., & Pinter, N. (2012). Levee effects upon flood levels: An empirical assessment. Hydrological Processes, 26(21), 3225–3240. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.8261
Hendriks, T. D., & Boersma, F. K. (2019). Bringing the state back in to humanitarian crises response: Disaster governance and challenging 
collaborations in the 2015 Malawi flood response. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 40, 101262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijdrr.2019.101262
Herslund, L. B., Jalayer, F., Jean-Baptiste, N., Jørgensen, G., Kabisch, S., Kombe, W., et al. (2016). A multi-dimensional assessment of urban 
vulnerability to climate change in Sub-Saharan Africa. Natural Hazards, 82(S2), 149–172. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-015-1856-x
Islam, S. N., & Winkel, J. (2017). Climate change and social inequality (p. 32).
Jain, G., & Bazaz, A. B. (2020). A multi-scalar approach for assessing costs and benefits of risk reduction alternatives for the people and the 
city: Cases of three resettlements in Visakhapatnam, India. Sustainability, 12(15), 5958. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12155958
Jha, A. K., Bloch, R., & Lamond, J. (2012). Cities and flooding: A guide to integrated urban flood risk management for the 21st century . The 
World Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/978-0-8213-8866-2
Johnson, C. (2018). On climate change, risk and relocation. DPU News.
Kjellstrom, T., Friel, S., Dixon, J., Corvalan, C., Rehfuess, E., Campbell-Lendrum, D., et al. (2007). Urban environmental health hazards and 
health equity. Journal of Urban Health, 84(S1), 86–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11524-007-9171-9
Konar, M., Garcia, M., Sanderson, M. R., Yu, D. J., & Sivapalan, M. (2019). Expanding the Scope and foundation of sociohydrology as the 
science of coupled human-water systems. Water Resources Research, 55, 874–887. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018WR024088
Leong, C. (2018). The role of narratives in sociohydrological models of flood behaviors. Water Resources Research , 54(4), 3100–3121. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/2017WR022036
Levy, C. (2018). A response to rising urban inequality: Knowledge in action for urban equality . DPU News. https://doi.
org/10.1017/9781108381659
Mitra, S., Mulligan, J., Schilling, J., Harper, J., Vivekananda, J., & Krause, L. (2017). Developing risk or resilience? Effects of slum up -
grading on the social contract and social cohesion in Kibera, Nairobi. Environment and Urbanization , 29(1), 103–122. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0956247816689218
Mulligan, J., Harper, J., Kipkemboi, P., Ngobi, B., & Collins, A. (2016). Community-responsive adaptation to flooding in Kibera, Kenya. In 
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers—Engineering sustainability . https://doi.org/10.1680/jensu.15.00060
Ng, S. (2016). Governance beyond the government: Responding to a reactionary flood governance regime in Ayutthaya, Thailand. Habitat 
International, 52, 11–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2015.08.029
Oliver-Smith, A., Alcántara-Ayala, I., Burton, I., & Lavell, A. (2017). The social construction of disaster risk: Seeking root causes. Interna-
tional Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 22, 469–474. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2016.10.006
Olthuis, K., Benni, J., Eichwede, K., & Zevenbergen, C. (2015). Slum Upgrading: Assessing the importance of location and a plea for a 
spatial approach. Habitat International, 50, 270–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2015.08.033
Osuteye, E., Johnson, C., & Brown, D. (2017). The data gap: An analysis of data availability on disaster losses in sub-Saharan African cities. 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 26, 24–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2017.09.026
Pelling, M. (2020). Aadel Brun Tschudi Annual Lecture 2017—Efficiency and equity in development geography, the SDGs and the Sendai 
Framework. Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift - Norwegian Journal of Geography, 74(1), 5–12. https://doi.org/10.1080/00291951.2020.1736144
Pelling, M., & Garschagen, M. (2019). Put equity first in climate adaptation. Nature, 569(7756), 327–329. https://doi.org/10.1038/
d41586-019-01497-9
Reckien, D., Creutzig, F., Fernandez, B., Lwasa, S., Tovar-Restrepo, M., Mcevoy, D., & Satterthwaite, D. (2017). Climate change, equi -
ty and the sustainable development goals: An urban perspective. Environment and Urbanization , 29(1), 159–182. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0956247816677778
Remo, J. W. F., Carlson, M., & Pinter, N. (2012). Hydraulic and flood-loss modeling of levee, floodplain, and river management strategies, 
Middle Mississippi River, USA. Natural Hazards, 61(2), 551–575. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9938-x
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
23 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 24]]
Water Resources Research
Ríos, D. (2015). Present-day capitalist urbanization and unequal disaster risk production: The case of Tigre, Buenos Aires. Environment 
and Urbanization, 27(2), 679–692. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247815583616
Rumbach, A. (2014). Do new towns increase disaster risk? Evidence from Kolkata, India. Habitat International, 43, 117–124. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2014.03.005
Rumbach, A. (2017). At the roots of urban disasters: Planning and uneven geographies of risk in Kolkata, India. Journal of Urban Affairs, 
39(6), 783–799. https://doi.org/10.1080/07352166.2017.1282771
Satterthwaite, D. (2001). From professionally driven to people-driven poverty reduction: Reflections on the role of Shack/Slum Dwellers 
International. Environment and Urbanization, 13(2), 135–138. https://doi.org/10.1177/095624780101300210
Satterthwaite, D., & Bartlett, S. (2017). Editorial: The full spectrum of risk in urban centres: Changing perceptions, changing priorities. 
Environment and Urbanization, 29(1), 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247817691921
Sayers, P., Penning-Rowsell, E. C., & Horritt, M. (2018). Flood vulnerability, risk, and social disadvantage: Current and future patterns in 
the UK. Regional Environmental Change, 18(2), 339–352. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-017-1252-z
Sivapalan, M., Konar, M., Srinivasan, V., Chhatre, A., Wutich, A., Scott, C. A., et al. (2014). Socio-hydrology: Use-inspired water sustaina -
bility science for the Anthropocene. Earth's Future, 2(4), 225–230. https://doi.org/10.1002/2013EF000164
Sivapalan, M., Savenije, H. H. G., & Blöschl, G. (2012). Socio-hydrology: A new science of people and water. Hydrological Processes, 26(8), 
1270–1276. https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.8426
Srinivasan, V., Sanderson, M., Garcia, M., Konar, M., Blöschl, G., & Sivapalan, M. (2016). Prediction in a socio-hydrological world. Hydro-
logical Sciences Journal, 62, 338–345. https://doi.org/10.1080/02626667.2016.1253844
UN DESA. (2019). World urbanization prospects: The 2018 revision (st/esa/ser.a/420). United Nations.
United Nations. (2015). Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable development . Retrieved from https://undocs.org/en/A/
RES/70/1
van Voorst, R. (2015). Applying the risk society thesis within the context of flood risk and poverty in Jakarta, Indonesia. Health, Risk & 
Society, 17(3–4), 246–262. https://doi.org/10.1080/13698575.2015.1071785
van Voorst, R. (2016). Formal and informal flood governance in Jakarta, Indonesia. Habitat International , 52, 5–10. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.habitatint.2015.08.023
Viglione, A., Di Baldassarre, G., Brandimarte, L., Kuil, L., Carr, G., Salinas, J. L., et al. (2014). Insights from socio-hydrology modelling 
on dealing with flood risk—Roles of collective memory, risk-taking attitude and trust. Journal of Hydrology , 518, 71–82. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.01.018
Walker, G., & Burningham, K. (2011). Flood risk, vulnerability and environmental justice: Evidence and evaluation of inequality in a UK 
context. Critical Social Policy, 31(2), 216–240. https://doi.org/10.1177/0261018310396149
Watson, V. (2009). 'The planned city sweeps the poor away…': Urban planning and 21st century urbanisation. Progress in Planning, 72(3), 
151–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progress.2009.06.002
Watson, V. (2014). African urban fantasies: Dreams or nightmares? Environment and Urbanization , 26(1), 215–231. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0956247813513705
Weinstein, L., Rumbach, A., & Sinha, S. (2019). Resilient growth: Fantasy plans and unplanned developments in India's flood-prone coastal 
cities. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 43(2), 273–291. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2427.12743
World Health Organization, & UN Habitat. (2016). Global report on urban health: Equitable healthier cities for sustainable development . 
World Health Organization.
Zevenbergen, C., Veerbeek, W., Gersonius, B., & Van Herk, S. (2008). Challenges in urban flood management: Travelling across spatial and 
temporal scales. Journal of Flood Risk Management, 1(2), 81–88. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-318X.2008.00010.x
Ziervogel, G., Waddell, J., Smit, W., & Taylor, A. (2016). Flooding in Cape Town's informal settlements: Barriers to collaborative urban risk 
governance. South African Geographical Journal, 98(1), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/03736245.2014.924867
MOULDS ET AL.
10.1029/2020WR029024
24 of 24
 19447973, 2021, 6, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2020WR029024 by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
