[[PAGE 1]]
Multiple Flood Experiences and Social Resilience: Findings from Three Surveys on
Households and Companies Exposed to the 2013 Flood in Germany
CHRISTIAN KUHLICKE,a,c TORSTEN MASSON,b SARAH KIENZLER,e,c TOBIAS SIEG,c,d
ANNEGRET H. THIEKEN,c AND HEIDI KREIBICHd
a Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research–UFZ, Department Urban and Environmental Sociology, Leipzig, Germany
b University of Applied Sciences Bielefeld, Department for Social Work, Bielefeld, Germany
c University of Potsdam, Institute of Environmental Science and Geography, Potsdam, Germany
d GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences, Section Hydrology, Telegrafenberg, Potsdam, Germany
e Department of Environmental Health and Protection of Ecosystems, German Environment Agency (UBA), Berlin, Germany
(Manuscript received 30 July 2018, in ﬁnal form 20 July 2019)
ABSTRACT
Previous studies have explored the consequences of ﬂood events for exposed households and companies by
focusing on single ﬂood events. Less is known about the consequences of experiencing repeated ﬂood events
for the resilience of households and companies. In this paper, we therefore explore how multiple ﬂoods
experience affects the resilience of exposed households and companies. Resilience was made operational
through individual appraisals of households and companies’ ability to withstand and recover from material as
well as health and psychological impacts of the 2013 ﬂood in Germany. The paper is based on three different
datasets including more than 2000 households and 300 companies that were affected by the 2013 ﬂood. The
surveys revealed that the resilience of households seems to increase, but only with regard to their subjectively
appraised ability to withstand impacts on mobile goods and equipment (e.g., cars, TV, and radios). In regard
to the ability of households to withstand overall ﬁnancial consequences of repetitive ﬂoods, evidence for
nonlinear (quadratic) trends can be found. With regard to psychological and health-related consequences, the
ﬁndings are mixed but provide tentative evidence for eroding resilience among households. Companies’
resilience increased with respect to material assets but appears to decrease with respect to ability to recover.
We conclude by arguing that clear and operational deﬁnitions of resilience are required so that evidence-
based resilience baselines can be established to assess whether resilience is eroding or improving over time.
1. Introduction
The immediate experience of a ﬂood event is often
associated with enormous ﬁnancial losses and can have
considerable negative health-related as well as psycho-
logically distressing consequences resulting in anxiety,
depression, or posttraumatic stress disorder, among
others ( Fernandez et al. 2015 ). For companies, ﬂoods
can cause considerable costs due to business interruption
as well as direct economic damage to buildings and
equipment (Chinh et al. 2016). In this sense, ﬂood experi-
ence may undermine a companies’ economic prosperity or
the resilience of ﬂood-exposed people, which includes not
just the immediate pathological consequences but also the
wider perception of individual agency, emotions attached
to the place of residency, social ties and networks, and trust
in responsible institutions (Kuhlicke et al. 2011 ; Tapsell
and Tunstall 2008; Walker-Springett et al. 2017).
At the same time, there is a rapidly growing body of
research showing that ﬂood events also offer an oppor-
tunity for change: in the aftermath of ﬂood events,
households, companies, and authorities seem to be more
inclined to invest in adaptation measures in order to
mitigate the consequences of future ﬂood events
(Kreibich et al. 2011 ; Thieken et al. 2007 ) and by doing
so are often able to reduce the monetary damage caused
by a subsequent ﬂood event quite effectively ( Bubeck
et al. 2012b ; Kreibich et al. 2017 ; Kreibich and Thieken
2009; Thieken et al. 2016b ).
However, most studies treat single ﬂood events in
isolation. By relying on a cross-sectional survey design,
empirical studies usually try to better understand how
Denotes content that is immediately available upon publica-
tion as open access.
Corresponding author : Christian Kuhlicke, christian.kuhlicke@
ufz.de
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 63
DOI: 10.1175/WCAS-D-18-0069.1
/C2112019 American Meteorological Society. For information regarding reuse of this content and general copyright information, consult the AMS Copyright
Policy (www.ametsoc.org/PUBSReuseLicenses).
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 2]]
individuals withstand and recover from the impact of
single ﬂood events ( Kuhlicke et al. 2011 ). Such event-
centered studies, however, are hardly able to capture
feedback effects ( Bubeck et al. 2012b ) or legacy effects
due to the experience of frequent ﬂood events. There-
fore, little is known about how a household’s or
company’s ﬂood history shapes its ability to withstand
and recover from a ﬂood event. With this study, we would
like to address this gap in research, which is relevant in
view of future ﬂood risk. Although there are profound
regional differences and uncertainties in numerical pro-
jections of future ﬂood risks ( Kundzewicz et al. 2014), it
is expected that ﬂood risk tends to increase in the fu-
ture. The reasons behind this are related to climate
change (Hirabayashi et al. 2013; Milly et al. 2008)a sw e l l
as the continuous increase in the population and eco-
nomic assets in ﬂood-prone areas (Jongman et al. 2012).
This study explores the cumulative effects of multiple
ﬂood experience on the resilience of affected house-
holds and companies. Resilience is understood here as a
household’s or a company’s ability to withstand and
recover from the impacts of a natural hazard. More
speciﬁcally, we focus on how household members as well
as companies perceive their own ability to withstand
damage to immobile and mobile objects as well as to
their psychological and health-related integrity. With
regard to recovery processes, we focus on how long it
took households to recover after the ﬂood event (in
months) and how their household situation changed as a
result of the ﬂood (i.e., worsened or improved). Com-
panies were asked how long their business activities
were interrupted or hampered as a consequence of
the ﬂood.
Empirically, the current research focuses on the 2013
ﬂood in the Elbe and Danube catchments of Germany,
which was a record-breaking event in hydrological terms
(Schröter et al. 2015 ). With about EUR 6–8 billion it
caused considerably lower direct losses than the 2002
ﬂood, which resulted in damage costs amounting to
EUR 11.6 billion ( DKKV 2003 , 2015). However, for
many households and companies, the 2013 ﬂood was the
second or third ﬂood event that they had experienced
since 2002. In addition to the 2002 ﬂood, ﬂoods also
occurred in 1999, 2005, 2006, 2010, and 2011 in the
Danube and Elbe catchments ( Kienzler et al. 2015). We
therefore regard the 2013 ﬂood as a possibility for better
understanding the interrelation of ﬂood experience and
resilience.
The current research is based on three different survey
samples, all of them conducted and collected indepen-
dently of each other. Acknowledging the differences in
the ways the surveys were conducted and the different
interests underlying the surveys, as well as the slightly
different ways in which questions were asked and how
answer categories were provided in the surveys, we do
not strive for a comparison in the strict sense but rather
look for common trends in our data.
Starting with a thorough literature review focusing on
the interrelation between ﬂood experience, adaptation,
and resilience (chapter 2), we further specify our con-
ceptual approach to resilience and adaptation as well as
the methodology underlying the three different samples
in chapter 3. In chapter 4, we present the empirical re-
sults and then summarize and discuss the methodologi-
cal and policy-relevant implications of our ﬁndings in
chapter 5. More detailed information on the statistical
analyses is provided in the appendix.
2. Literature review
a. Toward an operational deﬁnition of ﬂood resilience
Resilience is an opalescent term that has multiple
meanings in different scientiﬁc communities. Most of
the contemporary work on resilience refers to the deﬁ-
nition of ecological resilience developed by Holling
(1973) who integrated three different stability proper-
ties under the unifying umbrella term resilience; that is,
recovery (return to status quo after disturbance), re-
sistance (buffering the impact of a disturbance), and per-
sistence (staying intact as an id entiﬁable object/subject
over time) (Grimm and Wissel 1997).
This deﬁnition and its uncountable variations ( Brand
and Jax 2007 ; Fisher 2015) have become quite popular,
not only among ecologists but also among social scien-
tists ( Cote and Nightingale 2012 ; Hutter et al. 2013 ;
Kuhlicke 2013 ; Weichselgartner and Kelman 2015 )a s
well as among scholars working at the boundary be-
tween society and ecology ( Adger 2000 ; Folke et al.
2002; Thieken et al. 2014 ; Walker et al. 2004 ).
As an implication, there is no agreed-upon under-
standing let alone deﬁnition of resilience both in science
and practice ( Alexander 2013 ; Weichselgartner and
Kelman 2015). To give just a few examples, it is debated
whether resilience is a descriptive or a prescriptive
concept ( Berkes 2007 ; Kuhlicke 2013 , 2019) and
whether and how resilience differs from vulnerability
(Cutter et al. 2008 ; Fekete et al. 2014 ) or adaptive ca-
pacity ( Gallopín 2006 ). In this sense, resilience has be-
come an all-encompassing concept overloaded with
quite diverse stocks of meanings (Jones and Tanner 2017).
Brand and Jax are therefore concerned that ‘‘both con-
ceptual clarity and practical relevance of the concept of
resilience are critically in danger’’ ( Brand and Jax 2007 ,
p. 1). Similarly, Weichselgartner and Kelman plea for
more precisely deﬁning and operationalizing resilience
64 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 3]]
in order to be able to establish a clear baseline ‘‘against
which to make decisions regarding the resilience level’’
(Weichselgartner and Kelman 2015 , p. 10). They con-
sider this a relevant step forward in order to overcome
the vagueness of current resilience-based analysis and to
better connect the concept with ‘‘people’s experience on
the ground’’ (Weichselgartner and Kelman 2015 , p. 15).
In this paper, we aim to take on this challenge by
employing an operational deﬁnition of resilience, which
draws on debates in natural hazards research (Cutter et al.
2008). It focuses on how the capacity of households’ and
companies’ to cope with and recover from the impact of a
ﬂood is changing in consequence of experiencing multiple
ﬂoods. Furthermore, we are interested in subjective in-
terpretations of different dimensions of resilience (Jones
and Tanner 2017), that means how households and com-
panies evaluate their own ability to withstand and recover
from ﬂood-related impacts to immobile and mobile objects
as well as to their psychological and health-related integrity.
The relevance of taking such a comprehensive, actor-
centered perspective on resilience is highlighted by re-
cent studies. It is apparent that ﬂood events are associated
with a range of tangible and intangible consequences
(Bubeck et al. 2017 ; Kuhlicke et al. 2011 ; Thieken et al.
2016b). Next to monetary impacts ( Kreibich et al. 2014 ;
Meyer et al. 2013 ), this can include negative effects on
physical and mental health, i ncluding injuries but also
psychiatric symptoms (Ahern et al. 2005; Alderman et al.
2012): an increase in the cases of depression, anxiety, and
psychosomatic symptoms (headache, bodily pain) and
a higher probability of posttraumatic stress disorder
(Bonanno et al. 2010; Stein et al. 2007). Furthermore, re-
sults indicate that ﬂooding can negatively affects people’s
psychological well-being (Hudson et al. 2019)a n dl e a d st o
an increased use of medication (Fernandez et al. 2015). In
addition, Thieken et al. (2016a) and Reiter et al. (2018)
found that German households affected by the 2013 Elbe
ﬂood perceived psychological stress and recovery activities
more seriously than ﬁnancial losses. These ﬁndings un-
derline that an approach to resilience is needed that fo-
cuses on households’ and companies’ perception of their
own ability to withstand and recover from the different
kinds of negative consequences of ﬂood events, in-
cluding not just material aspects but also psychological
and health-related consequences. At the same time,
resilience of households and companies depends on
both prior ﬂood experience as well as on their previous
adaptive actions.
b. Multiple ﬂood experience, adaptation, and
resilience
In 1962 Robert W. Kates used the expression ‘‘prison
of experience’’ ( Kates 1962 , p. 140) to highlight how
future actions are guided by past experiences ( Kuhlicke
2010, 2015). Since then, studies have increasingly
focused on the interrelation of ﬂood experience, adap-
tation, and resilience ( Begg et al. 2017 ; Wachinger et al.
2013). Previous studies showed that direct ﬂood expe-
rience can have a positive effect on risk awareness
(Felgentreff 2003 ; Gotham et al. 2018 ; Lawrence et al.
2014; Plapp and Werner 2006 ), can result in a higher
awareness of the potential negative consequences of
climate change ( Ogunbode et al. 2017 ; Spence et al.
2011), and can increase the motivation to take adaptive
actions (Bubeck et al. 2012a ; Grothmann and Reusswig
2006; Lawrence et al. 2014 ; Zaalberg et al. 2009 ).
However, ﬂood experience should not be understood as
the sole driving factor for adaptive behavior; adaptive
behavior is inﬂuenced by various variables including
descriptive norms, negative affect, and outcome as well
as self-efﬁcacy (for an overview, see van Valkengoed
and Steg 2019 ).
At the same time, research has shown that personal
adaptive measures (e.g., measures taken to protect and
prepare one’s house before a ﬂood event) have positive
effects on ﬂood related damage as they reduce ﬂood-
related ﬁnancial damage up to 50% (Kreibich et al. 2015;
Poussin et al. 2015 ). Furthermore, there is an emerging
ﬁeld of research researching the nonmaterial beneﬁts of
individual-level adaptation strategies ( Lamond et al.
2018) by focusing on how adaptive actions are able to
prevent negative psychological impacts or to provide a
greater sense of security ( Hudson et al. 2019 ; Joseph
et al. 2015 ).
However, in most cases ﬂood experience is treated in
isolation. The dominant practice of conducting cross-
sectional surveys with a focus on single ﬂood events
usually neglects that adaptive behaviors, ﬂood experi-
ence, and resilience are not just developing dynamically
over time, they are also mutually inﬂuencing each other.
Although it is meanwhile acknowledged that the in-
terrelation between adaptive behavior and risk aware-
ness is shaped by feedback effects and recursive
processes (Siegrist 2013, 2014), little is known about the
feedback of ﬂood experience on resilience. A study
conducted by Begg et al. (2017) suggests that perceived
severity of an actual ﬂood experienced has a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on relevant motivational factors shaping the
willingness to take adaptive actions. Households that
perceived health and stress-related consequences due to
the 2013 ﬂood in Germany and that took adaptive
measure before the 2013 ﬂood report signiﬁcantly lower
response efﬁcacy as well as lower individual responsi-
bility after the ﬂood than respondents who im-
plemented measures but perceived the consequences
to be less severe.
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 65
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 4]]
However, to our knowledge, there is not a single study
published that focuses on how the frequency of ﬂood
experience inﬂuences the ability of households and
companies to withstand and recover from ﬂood events.
Based on the literature, we can only put forward the
hypothesis that ﬂood experience might be an important
factor that enhances the ability of households to with-
stand ﬂood related impacts and to recover quicker as
they might have developed some kind of routine-based
knowledge to cope more effectively with the immediate
ﬂood situation. At the same time, each ﬂood event might
also be associated with an enormous physical, mental,
and collective encumbrance resulting in possibly nega-
tive effects in the long run. In this sense, multiple ﬂood
experiences can also be understood as a burden for af-
fected households. For companies, the situation might
be different, as they might systematically improve their
coping and adaptive capacities. However, these are only
speculative thoughts, as there is no empirical evidence
available so far. With this study, we address this gap in
knowledge by providing empirical insights on the in-
terrelation of multiple ﬂood experience and resilience.
3. Theoretical constructs and methodology
a. Theoretical constructs
This study is based on three different theoretical
constructs ( Fig. 1 ). Based on Cutter et al. (2008) ,w e
distinguish conceptually between 1) adaptive actions
and emergency actions on the one hand and 2) resilience
on the other hand. 3) The third relevant construct was
respondents’ prior ﬂood experience. Figure 1 provides a
model underlying the analysis.
Individual adaptation and emergency actions are un-
derstood as actions that aim at preventing or minimizing
the anticipated or actual negative consequences of future
ﬂood events. They comprise l ong-term precautionary
measures such as informative measures (e.g., gathering
information on ﬂood loss mitigation, joining neighborhood
ﬂood networks), constructional measures (e.g., adapted
interior ﬁttings, sealing the cellar) and taking out natural
hazard insurance. They also include emergency measures
that are undertaken just before or during a ﬂood event
such as moving contents upstairs or protecting the
building against inﬂowing water ( Kreibich and Thieken
2009). Early warning is an important prerequisite for
undertaking emergency measures; however, it was not
part of this study.
Resilienceis understood as a household’s or a company’s
ability to withstand and/or recover after a disturbing
event. While resistance describes the ability to buffer
the negative consequences of a disturbing event,
recovery is understood as the ability to return to
daily life after a disturbing event. More speciﬁcally,
we operationalized the construct ‘‘withstand’’ how
households and companies rated the perceived im-
pacts on immobile and mobile objects as well as to
households’ respondents psychological and health-
related integrity. This in cludes information about
monetary losses (e.g., overall, building, household
contents, equipment, goods, business interruption) as
well as information about perceived consequences
associated with a ﬂood event indicated on ordinal scales
(overall, building, household contents, material objects,
sentimental objects, health, mental consequences/stress,
personal strain, business interruption). The construct
‘‘recovery’’ was made oper ational by asking house-
holds how long it took them to recover after the ﬂood
event (in months) and how their situation changed as
a result of the ﬂood, whereas companies were asked
how long their business activities were interrupted or
hampered.
Flood experience was taken into account by focusing
on households’ and companies’ prior ﬂood experience.
However, we did not analyze the total number of ﬂoods
experienced, but rather used the 2013 ﬂood as the ref-
erence event in all samples and grouped respondents for
which the 2013 ﬂood was the ﬁrst, second or third ﬂood
event or more.
We included additional variables, such as sociodemo-
graphic variables (i.e., age, tenure, gender, and building
type), companies’ characteristics (size, sector, tenure,
spatial situation) as well as ﬂood characteristics.
b. Case study areas
Empirically, the paper is based on three different sur-
veys.The surveys were collected in the German states most
affected by the 2013 ﬂood, among these, the states of
Saxony (EUR 1.9 billion direct losses in 2013) and
Bavaria (EUR 1.3 billion direct losses) ( DKKV 2015 ;
see Fig. 2).
The 2013 ﬂood caused with about EUR 6–8 billion
lower direct losses than the 2002 ﬂood, which resulted in
damage costs amounting to EUR 11.6 billion ( DKKV
2003, 2015). Damage on the household level usually
results from demolished building structures as well as
repair work, including replacing broken windows, re-
pairing heating systems, etc. In addition, households
needed to repair or replace damaged contents, such
as domestic appliances, telephone and computer sys-
tems, furniture or carpets. Losses for companies re-
lated also to different aspects refer above all to building
losses; equipment losses; losses to goods, products, and
stock; and losses due to business interruption ( Thieken
et al. 2016b).
66 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 5]]
In Germany, private adaptation measures are requested
by law from ﬂood prone property owners in accordance
with their resources and capabilities ( Begg et al. 2017 ).
Flood insurance penetration in Germany has increased
gradually over recent years ( Surminski and Thieken
2017), with large regional differences due to past com-
pulsory ﬂood insurance in the former German Democratic
Republic and in the federal state of Baden-Wuerttemberg
(Seifert et al. 2013).
c. Methodology
The different surveys were conducted independently
of each other. Table 1 provides an overview of the dis-
tribution of the three surveys and their sampling
procedures.
Table 2 gives a detailed overview of how the single
theoretical constructs were made operational in the
different samples. All surveys addressed the overarching
conceptual constructs of ‘‘adaptation’’ and ‘‘resilience,’’
however, there are differences in the items and scales
used to operationalize the constructs; there are also
differences in how the single questions were asked and
what kind of answer categories the surveys provided.
While in sample 1 households, respondents were asked
to report about the consequences of all ﬂood events
experienced, respondents in samples 2 households and
3 companies were asked to report only about the 2013
ﬂood. Prior ﬂood experience was taken into account by
asking respondents whether they had experienced a
ﬂood before and if yes, how many and when (before
2013). Furthermore, the extent to which adaptation
and emergency measures were enquired about differed
between sample 1 households on the one hand and
sample 2 households and 3 companies on the other. The
implications of the outlined differences are discussed
more in depth in chapter 5).
Due to the differences in the design of the questionnaires
and the data collection processes as well as the different
operationalization of the central constructs/measures,
we chose not to combine the samples but applied a
sample-based approach to look for converging evidence
or discrepancies across the three samples.
Sample 1 households was collected by employees of
the Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research and
includes households that experienced repetitive ﬂood-
ing between 2002 and 2013. The survey was distributed
personally and conducted in the German states of Saxony
and Bavaria. All towns surveyed have experienced
at least one ﬂood event, and most of them two or
even three. Flood risk maps from Z ürs Public (since
2014 renamed Kompass Naturgefahren; www.kompass-
naturgefahren.de) and ﬂood risk maps produced by the
Saxon government were used to identify the affected
areas in Saxony. For Bavaria, local councils were ap-
proached to identify areas that experienced ﬂooding in
2013. These councils provided us with detailed lists of
those streets that had been affected by ﬂooding in 2013
and before.
A total of 6502 questionnaires were distributed per-
sonally between six and eight months after the 2013
ﬂood (see Begg et al. 2017 for details). This included a
prepaid reply envelope and a letter explaining the
FIG. 1. Theoretical constructs and their relationship.
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 67
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 6]]
background of the survey and asking residents to return
the survey to the Helmholtz-Centre for Environmen-
tal Research (Zentrum fur Umweltforschung) (UFZ)
within the next days. In total, 1380 completed surveys
were returned, which provided an overall response rate
of 21.2%. Of the 1380 surveys, 990 were completed by
residents in Saxony (response rate of 21.7%), while 390
were completed by residents in Bavaria (response rate
of 20%). 65% of respondents were affected by the 2013
ﬂood ( N 5 889). Therefore, only these surveys were
used in this analysis. The questionnaire included de-
tailed questions about every single ﬂood event experi-
enced since 2002 in a chronological order to better
understand the cumulative effects of repeated ﬂood
experience (1999 was neglected as it was considered as a
rather minor ﬂood even in comparison to the 2002 and
subsequent ﬂood events). This included questions about
ﬁnancial losses, ﬁnancial support, and perceived conse-
quences. The survey also contained questions about
adaptation actions and about individual attitudes to the
distribution of responsibility as well as about decision-
making processes in ﬂood risk management ( Begg
et al. 2017 ).
The dataset sample 2 households was collected un-
der the responsibility of the University of Potsdam,
Geoforschungs Zentrum (GFZ) German Research Centre
for Geosciences and the reinsurance company Deutsche
Rückversicherung (DKKV 2015; Thieken et al. 2016b ).
It was based on computer-aided telephone interviews
(CATI) with residents that suffered from (ﬁnancial)
property damage due to ﬂooding in 2013 in Germany.
The interviews were conducted around nine months
after the ﬂood event. Based on information from af-
fected districts and municipalities, ﬂood reports, press
releases, or ﬂood maps [e.g., ZÜRS or ﬂood masks derived
from satellite data provided by German Aerospace
Center (Deutschen Zentrum f ür Luft- und Raumfahrt)
(DLR), Centre for Satellite Based Crisis information;
http://www.zki.dlr.de/], street lists were compiled, which
served as a basis for looking up the telephone numbers of
FIG. 2. Areas affected by the 2013 ﬂood and the number of questionnaires completed.
68 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 7]]
potentially affected residents from the public telephone
directory. All 43 281 searched telephone numbers were
contacted, from which 16 554 numbers were either not
recognized or available dur ing the campaign. Another
16 721 households stated that they had not been affected
by the ﬂood, with ‘‘affected’’ being deﬁned as having suf-
fered (ﬁnancial) ﬂood damage. In total 1652 interviews
were completed between 18 February and 24 March 2014.
The questionnaire represented a modiﬁed version of
previous surveys ( Kienzler et al. 2015 ; Kreibich et al.
2005; Thieken et al. 2017 ). Overall, it addressed a broad
range of topics such as ﬂood impact characteristics,
physical and ﬁnancial ﬂood losses to buildings and
household contents, ﬂood experience and ﬂood aware-
ness, precautionary measures, early warning, emergency
measures, evacuation, contamination of the ﬂood water,
cleanup, recovery of the affected household, general
characteristics of the building and household contents,
nonmaterial ﬂood effects (on health), aid and ﬁnancial
compensation, and sociodemographic variables. At the
beginning of the interview, the interviewer asked to
question the person in the household with the best
knowledge about the ﬂood event.
The dataset sample 3 companies focused on small
companies and was also collected by a joint venture
of the University of Potsdam, GFZ, and Deutsche
Rückversicherung ( DKKV 2015 ; Thieken et al. 2017 ,
2016b). The list of affected streets that was compiled for
sample 2 households formed the basis for generating
property-speciﬁc random samples of companies (i.e.,
their telephone numbers). Additional effort was un-
dertaken to increase the number of large companies in
the sample. Therefore, expert interviews were un-
dertaken and ﬂood and press reports were analyzed to
identify ﬂood-affected large companies. All companies
irrespective of their size were interviewed between
May and July 2014 using a standardized survey, which
resulted in 557 completed interviews. However, for these
analyses only small companies with #10 employees
and #EUR 1 million damage ( n 5 328) were selected
since we assume that smaller companies behave simi-
larly to households. The person with the most knowl-
edge about the ﬂood damage was interviewed.
The questionnaire addressed the following topics:
ﬂood impact (e.g., water depth, contamination), ﬂood
warning, emergency measures, evacuation, cleaning up,
characteristics of and damage to company assets (buildings,
equipment, goods, products, and stock, etc.), recovery,
precautionary measures, ﬂood experience and aware-
ness, and characteristics of the company (sector, number
of employees, etc.). Further details about the approach,
partly based on preceding surveys, are published in
Kreibich et al. (2007) , Thieken et al. (2016a , 2017), and
Sieg et al. (2017) .
d. Statistical analysis
The surveys were coded and analyzed using the sta-
tistics software SPSS and R Version 3.3.2. For statistical
analysis, we used correlational analysis (Spearman cor-
relations) to test for bivariate relationships between
ﬂood experience and our outcome variables (uptake of
adaptation and emergency actions, resilience indicators).
For multivariate relationships, we applied multiple lin-
ear regression analysis or logistic regression analysis
for dichotomous outcome variables. We included the
adoption of adaptation measures (constructional adap-
tation actions, insurance), the adoption of emergency
measures and resilience indicators (overall ﬂood con-
sequences, ﬁnancial damage, property damage, loss of
material objects, health- and stress-related consequences)
as dependent variables as well as respondents’ socio-
demographic characteristics (age, tenure, building type)
and their previous ﬂood experience as independent
variables in the analysis. To test for possible nonlinear
(i.e., quadratic) effects of previously experienced ﬂoods
on household resilience, we included the number of
previous ﬂood experiences and its quadratic term in the
regression ( Miller et al. 2013 ). This strategy has been
applied in previous research ( Klein et al. 2011 ). Fol-
lowing Miller et al. (2013) , we mean centered the data
TABLE 1. Overview of the main commonalities and differences of the samples.
Sample 1 households Sample 2 households Sample 3 companies
Survey Personally distributed, prepaid
reply envelope; two weeks
later reminder was sent
Computer-aided telephone
interviews, lasted between 20
and 40 min
Computer-aided telephone
interviews, lasted on average
34 min
Sampling/screening Households surveyed located
in affected areas
Only households that had
suffered ﬁnancial ﬂood losses
were surveyed
Only companies that had suffered
ﬁnancial ﬂood losses were
surveyed
Persons addressed Person that had birthday most
recently before the
distribution of the survey and
who is older than 18
Most competent person in
households with regard
to ﬂooding
Most competent person in
company with regard to ﬂood
damage
J
ANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 69
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 8]]
TABLE 2. Detailed overview on questions and answer categories provided in the samples.
Sample 1 households Sample 2 households Sample 3 companies
Prior ﬂood experience
Affected by a ﬂood? (yes; no; year) /
2013 as the ﬁrst, second, or third ﬂood
How often have you been affected by a ﬂood
before May/June 2013? (number)
Was this commercial property
affected by a ﬂood before
May/June 2013? (number)
When was the last time you were affected by a
ﬂood before May/June 2013? (month, year)
When was the last time this
commercial property was
affected by a ﬂood before
May/June 2013? (month, year)
Adaptation and emergency actions
Did you undertake any measure to protect
your property in the last years (yes; no;
year; description of measure)
Which of the following precautionary measures
have you already implemented before the ﬂood
event in May/June 2013, have you
implemented during/after this ﬂood, are you
planning to implement in the next 6 months ?
[implemented before the ﬂood; during/after
the ﬂood; planned within the next 6 months;
not (yet) intended/not possible; provided list
of 16 measures with regard to information
precaution, propert y-level mitigation
measures, contract insurance, others]—
multiple answers possible
When did you implement the
following precautionary measure:
xxx
a. Or are you planning to
implement the measure in the
next 6 months, or are you
currently not intending to
implement the measure. Please
provide the year when you have
implemented the measure, or
answer ‘‘planned in the next
6 months,’’ or ‘‘not intended.’’
Construction measures: Ex-post
categorization based on the answer
provided to previous question
(description of measures)
Did you, or someone else, undertake emergency
measures to mitigate damage to the building or
household contents? I will now quote some of
these measures. Please tell me what applies to
you. (provided list of emergency measures:
safeguard documents and valuables; drive
vehicles to a ﬂood-safe place; put moveable
contents upstairs; protect oil tanks; install
water pump; safeguard domestic animals/pets;
protect the building against inﬂowing water;
redirect water ﬂow; switch off gas/electricity;
gas/electricity was switched off by public
services; others)—multiple answers possible
Were damage reduction measures
undertaken before or during the
ﬂood in your company; for
instance, did you try to protect
goods and material by raising,
removing, etc. these. Or did you
try to prevent water from
entering the building? (yes; no)
Insured against natural hazards?
[contracted an insurance in (year); did
apply for an insurance but did not
receive one; interested, but too
expensive; terminated contract, since
personally not satisﬁed; the insurance
terminated the contract (year); do not
want to have one; took other measures;
others]—multiple answers possible
Did you undertake any action during the
ﬂood in order to reduce damage from
ﬂooding? (yes; no; informed about
ﬂood, sandbags, put valuables upstairs,
moved car/motor vehicle out of the
ﬂood zone, others)—multiple answers
possible (number of measures taken)
Did you inform yourself about the ﬂood
risk before the ﬂood event (yes; no)
Resilience
Monetary damage (yes; no; overall sum of
damage in EUR)
If you include the cost (material and labor) for all
necessary repair work at/within the building,
what was the overall building loss? (sum of
damage in EUR)
How high was the total building
damage? (sum of damage in
EUR)
Perception of consequences (for
the overall household; physical
consequences; psychological
consequences, loss of valuable
objective, loss of sentimental
objects (Likert-scale from 1–5)
How do you estimate the total cost for restoring
your damaged household contents? (sum of
loss in EUR)
How high was the total equipment
damage (without motor
vehicles)? (sum of damage in
EUR)
70 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 9]]
for the number of previously experienced ﬂoods prior to
computing the quadratic term.
4. Results: Flood experience, adaptation, and
resilience
a. Sociodemographic characteristics
The comparison of the main sociodemographic char-
acteristics of the two different samples related to
households (samples 1 households and 2 households)
revealed quite profound differences (see appendix for
details, Table A2). Sample 2 households is characterized
by a higher mean age, a higher proportion of female
respondents, a higher share of homeowners, a higher
share of detached houses, and a higher share of people
with lower ﬂood experience. Some of the differences can
be traced back to differences in the sampling and
screening procedures of the surveys, as well as the
techniques of the survey. Telephone surveys are in-
creasingly hampered by the substitution of landlines by
mobile phones. Younger adults ( ,30 years), especially,
tend to live in wireless-only households, leading to an
underrepresentation of this age group in landline-only
surveys ( Greenberg and Weiner 2014 ). As a result,
the average age in sample 2 households is higher than
in sample 1 households; the latter was based on a
paper-and-pencil questionnaire (see Table 1 ). Further-
more, the use of the term ‘‘ﬂood-affected’’ differs across
the three samples: while sample 1 households uses a
broad interpretation of ‘‘ﬂood-affected,’’ including res-
idents that (only) suffered from no power supply or
trafﬁc disruptions, sample 2 households and 3 companies
deﬁne ‘‘ﬂood-affected’’ as having suffered (ﬁnancial)
ﬂood damage. This resulted in high screen-out rates of
almost 40% (see description of sample 2 households
above) and probably led to a higher share of home-
owners—and consequently to a higher share of detached
and terraced houses—in sample 2 households compared
to sample 1 households ( Table 3). Finally, the design of
the surveys differs across the three samples: sample
1 households was based on a lumped approach focusing
on hot spot areas that have experienced repeated ﬂood-
ing, while samples 2 households and 3 companies aimed at
surveying all areas that were ﬂooded in 2013 including
regions that had not been affected by the ﬂood of 2002,
for example, in the federal state of Baden-Wuerttemberg,
Thuringia, most of Lower Saxony, and some regions in
Saxony-Anhalt (along the river Saale). Consequently, the
share of residents that experienced ﬂooding for the ﬁrst
time is higher in sample 2 households than in sample
1 households ( Table 3 ). Despite these differences, we
think that the conceptual commonalities across the three
samples are sufﬁcient to jointly explore the effect of re-
peated ﬂooding on adaptation and resilience.
b. Multiple ﬂood experiences and adaptation
Based on previous ﬁndings (see section 2), the study is
based on the hypothesis that the experience of (multi-
ple) ﬂood events leads to an increasing capacity to act
before, during and after an event. This assumption
was tested by analyzing how the number of ﬂoods
that respondents experienced between 2002 and 2013
correlates with adaptation actions taken before or dur-
ing the 2013 ﬂood (see Tables A1–A3 for details).
TABLE 2. (Continued)
Sample 1 households Sample 2 households Sample 3 companies
How long did it take to return to daily life?
(less than a month; 1–2 months; 3–5
months; more than 6 months; did not yet
return; it will never return)
To what extent the ﬂood event of May/June 2013
still puts a strain on you? [scale from 1 (it
doesn’t strain me at all anymore/I feel like
before the event) to 6 (it strains me still a lot)]
How high was the total damage to
goods, products and stock? (sum
of damage in EUR)
How did household situation change in
consequence of the ﬂood?
(considerably worse than before the
ﬂood; worse; similar; better)
I now call you possible damage caused by
ﬂooding. How serious did you perceive each of
the witnessed damage types [scale from 1 (not
serious at all) to 6 (very serious); provided list
of consequences, e.g.,: health complaints;
psychological or other forms of stress; damage
to buildings and household contents; other
ﬁnancial damage (like cars, outdoor facilities);
loss of items of special personal signiﬁcance]
How high were the damage due to
business interruption? (sum of
damage in EUR)
How many months did it take you after the event
to completely restore your building/household
contents? (less than a month; 1–2 months;
3–6 months; more than 6 months)
How long was the business
operation interrupted? (time
in days)
a Question was stated for 13 different precautionary measures ranging from insurance, to property-level mitigation measures to relocation
to a ﬂood safe area.
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 71
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 10]]
It is noteworthy, that the general percentage of in-
terviewees who implemented adaptation actions and
thus responded positively to the questions is higher in
sample 2 households (see Table 4 ). We attribute this
difference predominantly to two factors: ﬁrst, the con-
siderably higher share of homeowners in sample 2
households—homeowners usually have more possibili-
ties (particularly in respect to constructional measures)
and a higher motivation to implement adaptation mea-
sures ( Bubeck et al. 2012a ,b); second, to the way in
which the questions were asked in the survey. While in
sample 1 households, households were openly asked
about whether and which adaptation actions they had
taken, sample 2 households provided respondents with a
prepared list of speciﬁc measures they could choose
from. This inﬂuences the response behavior. For ex-
ample, in a survey distributed in 2002, water pumps and
backﬂow preventers were not included and therefore
only a few household (less than 5%) mentioned these
measures. In subsequent surveys, these measures were
included and more than 20% (backﬂow preventer) and
even 50%–70% (water pumps) stated they had these
measures in place ( Kienzler et al. 2015 ).
Generally, the empirical results indicate a rather ro-
bust, but modest, signiﬁcant positive correlation be-
tween ﬂood experience and the adaptation/emergency
actions of households and companies (for more details
see Tables A1–A3). There are signiﬁcant correlations in
all three samples for almost all of the tested variables
indicating that the more often households experienced a
(damaging) ﬂood event, the more likely they were to
take action in order to adapt. In addition, there is also a
signiﬁcant positive correlation with regard to taking out
insurance and ﬂood experience among the surveyed
households. However, while households tend to take out
insurance after experiencing their ﬁrst ﬂood, their op-
portunity to do so is decreased after the second ﬂood
(see Table 3 ). It is often the case that insurance com-
panies do not insure buildings with prior ﬂood damage,
or only with high premiums ( Seifert et al. 2013 ), al-
though the assessment of insurability according to the
hazard zoning system ZÜRS is gaining more importance
than the number of previous claims ( DKKV 2015).
In addition, we conducted a regression analysis to
investigate which of the tested variables inﬂuence ad-
aptation actions (see Table 5; for more details see Tables
A4–A6). For households, this included age, tenure, and
building type in addition to ﬂood experience. For com-
panies, this included ﬂood experience, size of the com-
pany, sector, spatial situation, and tenure.
The regression analysis for sample 1 households
revealed that all tested adaptation and emergency
measures show a positive relationship between ﬂood
experience and adaptation. There is also a positive re-
lationship between tenure and adaptation (i.e., home-
owners adopted adaptation measures more often than
renters). The analysis for sample 2 households showed
that being a homeowner and having experienced (mul-
tiple) ﬂoods before 2013 increases the likelihood for
households to take adaptation and emergency measures,
with the exception of taking out ﬂood insurance, which is
only inﬂuenced by tenure. In addition, both in sample
1 households and 2 households, age was negatively
correlated with undertaking emergency measures dur-
ing the ﬂood and implementing constructional adapta-
tion measures, respectively (sample 2 households).
Results for sample 3 companies revealed that ﬂood
experience has a signiﬁcant positive inﬂuence on adapta-
tion and emergency actions taken by companies, but again
not on insurance. The only signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
the decision to take out natural hazard insurance was
‘‘tenure,’’ which seems to be plausible, since tenants are
not likely to insure the respective building of their
company (although they can insure their contents).
c. Households: Multiple experience and resilience
In a ﬁrst step, we analyzed the ability of households to
withstand damage to immobile objects (i.e., buildings) .
Figure 3 reveals that ﬁnancial damage to a building fell
considerably between the ﬁrst and the second ﬂood. The
third ﬂood was again associated with higher damage
than the second ﬂood. A drop in the amount of ﬁnancial
damage thus pointed toward an increased ability of
households to withstand damage to buildings and other
rather immobile objects. We attributed the higher ﬁ-
nancial damage in sample 2 households to the higher
TABLE 3. Main sociodemographic characteristics of household samples.
Sample 1 households Sample 2 households
Age Mean: 56.2 years ( n 5 889) Mean: 59.3 years ( n 5 1328)
Gender Female/male: 43.2%/56.8% ( n 5 902) Female/male: 59.1%/41.9% ( n 5 1433)
Tenure Renter/owner: 37.1%/62.9% ( n 5 881) Renter/owner: 17.4%/82.6% ( n 5 1433)
Building type Detached/row/multifamily house:
32.7%/16.7%/50.6% (n 5 856)
Detached/row/multifamily house:
44.0%/27.9%/28.2% (n 5 1428)
Flood experience 2013 ﬂood as ﬁrst/second/third 1 ﬂood:
36.8%/44.7%/18.5% (n 5 889)
2013 ﬂood as ﬁrst/second/third 1 ﬂood:
45.8%/31.3%/22.9% (n 5 1433)
72 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 11]]
share of homeowners, who usually experience and re-
port higher ﬁnancial damage.
The perceived consequences of damage to buildings
corresponded with reported ﬁnancial damages. How-
ever, while the ﬁnancial damage for the third ﬂood were
considerably lower than the ﬁrst ﬂood, the perceived
consequences reach similar (sample 2 households) or
even higher values (sample 1 households) with regard to
the building damage (see Fig. 3).
There are different reasons for this nonlinear, U-
shaped pattern. To exclude this U shape from being a
result of ﬂood characteristics, we tested whether and
how the ﬁnancial damage correlate with ﬂood charac-
teristics (i.e., water level and duration). While damage
to the building correlated positively with both water
depth and the duration of ﬂooding (see Table A3 ), the
results also indicated that respondents with more ﬂood
experience were affected by higher water levels, but still
reported lower damage. This suggests that the observed
pattern for ﬁnancial damage with regard to ﬂood expe-
rience cannot simply be explained by ﬂood characteris-
tics, but that other variables also inﬂuence the ﬁnancial
damage for companies and households—a point we re-
turn to in the discussions section in chapter 5.
In a second step, we analyzed the ability of households
to withstand damage to mobile objects (contents) . The
ability of households to withstand losses to mobile
objects increased signiﬁcantly between the ﬁrst and
the second ﬂood experienced (see Fig. 4 ): when the
2013 ﬂood was the ﬁrst ﬂood experienced, this again
resulted in the highest values with regard to the loss of
or damage to mobile objects—whether of ﬁnancial or
sentimental value. However, thereafter values remained
on a similar (sample 2 households) or slightly lower level
(sample 1 households) if the 2013 ﬂood was experienced
as the third ﬂood.
In a third step, we analyzed the ability of households to
withstand negative psychological and health-related conse-
quences. The ability to withstand the negative psycholog-
ical and health-related consequences was again different to
the previously reported ability to withstand damage
to immobile and mobile objects (seeFig. 3), as it seems to
decline with ﬂood experience. However, there are also
profound differences between both samples. In sample
1 households, there was evidence that health-related
and—descriptively—psychological consequences follow
a nonlinear pattern (i.e., consequences are perceived
as more severe in the case of a third ﬂood) indicating
an exponential relationship between multiple ﬂood ex-
periences and stress- and health-related consequences.
However, in sample 2 households, it was the ﬁrst ﬂood
that was associated with the highest values, followed by
the third ﬂood.
TABLE 4. Adaptation/emergency actions and previous ﬂood experience (2013 as reference ﬂood).
Sample 1 households Sample 2 households Sample 3 households
2013 as ... First ﬂood Second ﬂood Third 1 ﬂood First ﬂood Second ﬂood Third 1 ﬂood First ﬂood Second ﬂood Third 1 ﬂood
Adaptation actions/yes (general) 42.2% 53.8% 70.6% 87.4% 93.3% 93.2% 55.4% 71.6% 75.0%
n327 n383 n163 n650 n447 n324 n139 n109 n92
Adaptation actions/yes (constructional) 12.5% 16.4% 35.0% 54.9% 63.6% 78.4% 22.6% 35.8% 39.1%
n327 n383 n163 n645 n445 n324 n137 n109 n92
Insurance/yes 35.1% 60.7% 54.3% 53.4% 63.5% 60.6% 24.5% 33.0% 35.9%
n305 n359 n151 n627 n439 n317 n139 n109 n92
Emergency actions 2013/yes 90.8% 96.7% 98.1% 90.1% 96.0% 96.6% 79.1% 99.1% 95.7%
n305 n391 n162 n655 n449 n327 n139 n109 n92
Informed about risk/yes 52.3% 60.7% 63.6% 51.8% 60.7% 71.9% — — —
n323 n366 n151 n629 n440 n317
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 73
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 12]]
In a fourth step, we analyzed how households were
able to recover: the time it took for households to return
to daily life and the relative change of the household
situation compared to before the ﬂood were positively
correlated to the number of ﬂoods experienced, at least
in sample 1 households. Among respondents who ex-
perienced 2013 as their third ﬂood, 72% ( n 5 161) re-
ported that it took them three months or longer to return
to daily life, compared to 67.1% ( n 5 325) who experi-
enced 2013 as their ﬁrst and 52.7% ( n 5 366) as their
second ﬂood. Similarly, the share of respondents who
perceived their household situation to be worse or
considerably worse compared to their preﬂood situation
was higher (43.9%, n 5 157) for respondents that ex-
perienced 2013 as their third ﬂood in comparison to the
answers provided by respondents from households that
had experienced less ﬂoods (ﬁrst ﬂood: 29.5%, n 5 312;
second ﬂood: 29.5%, n 5 353).
The results of sample 2 households indicate a some-
what different pattern regarding postimpact recovery.
The results revealed that respondents who experienced
ﬂoods for the third time needed signiﬁcantly less time on
average to completely restore their buildings compared
to respondents who were affected for the ﬁrst or second
time. Results on recovery time with respect to house-
hold contents showed a similar, albeit nonsigniﬁcant
FIG. 3. Financial damages, their perception, and previous ﬂood experience (2013 reference event).
TABLE 5. Summary results of regression analysis—adaptation of households and companies. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Dependent variables Age Tenure Building type Sum ﬂood Sum ﬂood 2
Sample 1 households
Adaptation measures in general 1** 1**
Constructional adaptation measures 1** 1**
Insurance 1** 1**
Sum of emergency measure 2* 1** 1**
Sample 2 households
Adaptation measures in general 1** 1*
Constructional adaptation measures 2** 1** 1**
Insurance 1**
Emergency measure 2* 1** 1**
Dependent variables Size Sector Ownership Spatial situation Sum ﬂood
Sample 3 households
Adaptation measures in general 2** 1** 1**
Constructional adaptation measures 1*
Insurance 1*
Emergency measure 2**
74 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 13]]
trend. At this point, however, it must be taken into ac-
count that the corresponding question regarding re-
spondents’ recovery was slightly different between
sample 1 households and 2 households (see Table 2). In
contrast to sample 1 households, the question in sample
2 households primarily related to the recovery time of
material values and was evaluated separately for dam-
age to building and damage to household contents.
To further investigate household resilience, we sub-
mitted the different measures of resilience (ﬁnancial
damage, perceived consequences, time to recover) to
multiple regression analysis, including the number of
ﬂood events experienced as well as the ownership status
(owner vs tenant), the type of building (detached/
terraced/multifamily house), age (as covariates), and
constructional adaptation (yes/no) in the regression. To
additionally test for nonlinear effects of ﬂood experi-
ence we also included the squared number of ﬂood
events experienced (for a similar strategy, see Klein
et al. 2011 ; Masson and Barth 2019 ).
For sample 1 households, results of the regression
analyses generally supported the ﬁndings described
above (see Table 6 ; for more detailed information see
Table A5), that is, the relationship between the number
FIG. 4. Perceived average consequences and previous ﬂood experience (2013 as reference ﬂood).
TABLE 6. Summary results of regression analysis—adaptation of households. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Dependent variables Age Tenure Building type Sum ﬂood Sum ﬂood 2 Construction adaptation
Sample 1 households
Financial damage (Fd) 2** 1**
Perceived overall consequences 2** 1**
Perceived damage to building 1** 2** 1**
Perceived loss of material objects 2** 1**
Perceived loss of sentimental objects 1* 1** 2** 1** 2*
Perceived health consequences 2** 2** 1**
Perceived stress consequences 2*
Duration to recover 1** 2** 1**
Dependent variables Age Tenure Building type Sum ﬂood Sum ﬂood 2 Construction adaptation
Sample 2 households
Fd to building 1* 1**
Fd to household content 1** 2** 2**
Perceived damage to building 1* 2**
Perceived loss to household content 2** 2**
Perceived loss of sentimental objects 2** 2**
Perceived health consequences 2**
Perceived stress consequences 2**
Perceived personal strain 1** 2**
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 75
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 14]]
of ﬂoods experienced and the resilience measures (ex-
ception: psychological consequences) are nonlinear,
corroborating the patterns displayed in Figs. 3 and 4.
For instance, our ﬁndings indicated a quadratic
(U shaped) relationship between the number of ﬂoods
experienced on the one hand and the ﬁnancial damage
to households and consequences to the building on the
other. The regression analysis conducted for sample
2 households revealed that there is a negative relation-
ship between constructional adaptation and reported
ﬁnancial damage to household contents, indicating
that more adapted households also reported lower
damage. A similar pattern could be observed in sample
1 households with regard to the loss of sentimental ob-
jects and adaptation.
d. Companies: Multiple ﬂood experiences and
resilience
Among the companies interviewed, the distributional
pattern for ﬁnancial damage with regard to buildings
was different to households (see Fig. 5): companies that
experienced the 2013 ﬂood as their second ﬂood event
reported the highest damage on average. Financial
damage due to business interruptions also resulted in the
highest values, if 2013 was experienced as the second
ﬂood. However, both ﬁnancial damage to the building
and due to business interruption decreased with the
third ﬂood event. This seems to point toward a weak
trend that asset damage decrease with increasing expe-
rience. This trend becomes more robust with respect to
ﬁnancial damage to mobile equipment and goods. Both
correlated negatively with the number of ﬂoods expe-
rienced as damage decreased linearly with each ﬂood
event. This seems to point to a learning effect after each
ﬂood event resulting in lower damage.
Business interruption was shortest for those compa-
nies who experienced the 2013 ﬂood as their ﬁrst ﬂood.
The longest business interruptions were suffered by
companies experiencing the 2013 ﬂood as their second
ﬂood, whereby the difference between the ﬁrst and the
second ﬂood were signiﬁcant and the difference be-
tween the second and third were not. Similar to private
households, it was also the case that companies with
more ﬂood experience were affected by higher water
levels. Thus, the potentially positive effects of more
experience are counteracted by the negative effects of
higher hazard magnitudes.
For this sample, regression analysis revealed no sig-
niﬁcant relationship between experience and resilience
(see Table 7). It was mainly the companies’ size that had
an effect on their resilience.
5. Discussion
The three different surveys revealed that there is a
strong positive correlation between ﬂood experience
and adaptation among all samples: households and
companies that had experienced repeated ﬂooding prior
to 2013 were more likely to invest in adaptation actions
and were also more capable of mitigating damage during
the 2013 ﬂood (also by taking emergency actions)
compared to respondents with less or no previous ﬂood
experience. Our ﬁndings thus conﬁrm previous research
on ﬂood experience and adaptation, both for affected
households and companies.
Based on our empirical data and the analyses we
conducted, it is difﬁcult to judge whether increased ad-
aptation also leads to greater resilience of households
and companies. Our ﬁndings rather underline that
resilience is inﬂuenced by many characteristics.
Prior ﬂood experience shapes the resilience of
households and companies. Generally speaking, be-
tween households’ ﬁrst and second experienced ﬂood,
an increase in resilience can be detected. When 2013 was
experienced as the second, the ability to withstand
FIG. 5. Consequences for companies (ﬁnancial damage and
business interruption).
TABLE 7. Summary results of regression analysis—adaptation of
companies. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Dependent variables Size Tenure Sector
Spatial
situation
Sum
ﬂood
Sample 3 companies
Fd do building 1**
Fd to equipment 1** 2**
Fd to goods and stocks 1* 2** 2*
Fd due to business
interruption
1**
Business interruption
in days
76 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 15]]
ﬁnancial damage was higher, as well as the ability to
withstand damage to immobile and mobile objects.
Furthermore, the ability to withstand negative psycho-
logical and health-related consequences increased or
remained on a similar level. We attribute the difference
between the ﬁrst and the second ﬂood to a learning ef-
fect that results in an increased capacity to act upon and
to cope with the consequences of ﬂooding.
When households experienced the 2013 ﬂood as their
third ﬂood, their ability to withstand damage to immo-
bile objects decreased compared to the second ﬂood.
Experiencing a third ﬂood seemed to act as a tipping
point; a preliminary ﬁnding that needs further explora-
tion in future research. There are different reasons for
this nonlinear, U-shaped pattern. While damage to the
building correlated positively with both water depth and
duration of ﬂooding (see Table A3), the results also in-
dicated that respondents with more ﬂood experience
were affected by higher water levels, although they still
reported lower damage. This suggests that the observed
pattern for ﬁnancial damage with regard to ﬂood expe-
rience cannot simply be explained by ﬂood characteris-
tics. Even if somewhat speculative, the reported higher
damage for the third ﬂood might also be a result of
learning effects among respondents of how to account
for ﬁnancial damage. This could therefore represent a
reporting bias due to a more realistic assessment of the
ﬁnancial damage compared to households with less
ﬂood experience.
When households experienced the 2013 ﬂood as their
third ﬂood, their ability to withstand negative psycho-
logical and health-related consequences also decreased.
While sample 2 households show a similar U-shape
pattern as the ﬁnancial damage, the ﬁndings of sample
1 households reveal an exponential relationship. There
is evidence that households’ capacity to cope with a
ﬂood event emotionally and healthwise is undermined,
if respondents have experienced their third ﬂood. It also
took households longer to recover and their situation
was worse or considerably worse compared to before the
ﬂood (sample 1 households). In our interpretation this
supports the assumption that experiencing three ﬂoods
within a relatively short time span can be understood
as a chronically distressing situation that results in a
deterioration of human well-being and thus undermines
the resilience of households (see also research on
learned helplessness for similar results; Seligman and
Peterson 2001).
If households experienced their third ﬂood, their
ability to withstand damage to mobile objects increased.
Such objects can be moved without great effort and
residents report lower losses with each ﬂood event ex-
perienced. Another ﬁnding of sample 2 households points
in a similar direction, revealing that respondents who
experienced the 2013 ﬂood as their third ﬂood, required
signiﬁcantly less time on average to restore their buildings
compared to respondents who were affected for the ﬁrst
or second time. With each ﬂood event experienced,
households develop certain ﬂood-related capacities that
help them to reduce damage and restore buildings and
interiors quicker than for previous ﬂoods. However, the
result might also indicate that households simply had less
mobile objects that were exposed to the risk of ﬂooding.
This, however, is difﬁcult to capture in a survey.
Companies’ ability to withstand direct ﬁnancial losses
increases when they experience multiple ﬂood events,
particularly with regard to mobile goods and equipment.
However, the negative consequences of business in-
terruption increase with ﬂood experience. This indicates
that companies are able to reduce damage to their ma-
terial assets, but they have difﬁculties to recover from
the ﬂood event and to return to the same state of busi-
ness that they were in before the ﬂood occurred.
With regard to losses of valuable objects, ﬁndings for
companies were quite similar to the households’ results.
Furthermore, companies seem to build up experience-
based capacities with each ﬂood event, reducing the
vulnerability of mobile equipment and goods. Again, bi-
variate correlation analysis with respect to sample 3
companies also supports this relationship as companies
with multiple ﬂood experiences have signiﬁcantly taken
adaptation and emergency actions more often. However,
such companies also experienced higher damage, which
might have been even higher without adaptation, point-
ing again to the contingent relationship between adap-
tation and resilience. Whether this ﬁnding also holds for
medium-size or large companies still needs to be tested.
Implications for future research
Based on our ﬁndings, we ﬁrst suggest that there is a
need to establish more systematic and evidence-based,
resilience-related baselines against which the various in-
terventions of local, regional, and national initiatives or
the implementation of private (i.e., at the property level)
or public adaptation measures can be evaluated
(Weichselgartner and Kelman 2015 ). In many coun-
tries private actors are asked to take on greater re-
sponsibility in ﬂood risk management and more generally in
terms of climate adaptation, by reducing their individual
risks through their own adaptation actions ( Begg et al.
2015). It is usually assumed that such actions have positive
effects (Begg et al. 2017). While our ﬁndings support such
effects, particularly with re gard to mobile objects (e.g.,
furniture, cars, and sentimental objects), such simple re-
lationships are harder to detect with regard to building
damage, but also with regard toperceived psychological and
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 77
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 16]]
TABLE A1. Correlations (Corr) sample 1 households. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01. Signiﬁcant correlations are in bold.
Spearman Adaptation and emergency actions Resilience Sociodemographic
v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 v7 v8 v9 v10 v11 v12 v13 v14 v15 v16 v17 v18
v1: Number of ﬂoods
experienced
Corr 0.200** 0.188** 0.176** 0.130** 20.089** 20.077 20.036 0.132** 0.090* 0.026 20.185** 20.278** 20.009 0.103** 0.157** 0.003 0.077*
N 873 873 815 858 840 601 880 670 722 737 510 488 852 822 889 859 894
Adaptation and
emergency actions
V2: Adaptation actions Corr 0.197** 0.452** 0.201** 0.149** 20.252** 20.046 0.019 0.193** 0.076* 0.080* 20.046 20.064 0.070* 0.072* 0.069* 0.219** 20.092**
N 873 873 795 833 819 586 854 653 704 721 501 478 830 803 860 831 865
V3: Constructional
adaptation actions
Corr 0.180** 0.452** 0.166** 0.084* 20.157** 0.008 0.077* 0.144** 0.079* 0.135** 20.028 20.078 0.045 0.117** 0.047 0.302** 20.193**
N 873 873 795 833 819 586 854 653 704 721 501 478 830 803 860 831 865
V4: Insurance Corr 0.189** 0.201** 0.166** 0.091* 20.147** 0.201** 20.028 0.130** 0.130** 0.059 20.111* 20.097* 0.068 20.001 0.159** 0.349** 20.223**
N 815 795 795 782 763 548 802 610 655 669 465 446 775 745 804 776 808
V5: Emergency
actions during
2013 ﬂood
Corr 0.133** 0.149** 0.084* 0.091* 20.123** 20.085* 20.046 0.016 20.014 20.023 20.155** 20.186** 20.052 20.070* 0.000 0.095** 20.027
N 858 833 833 782 803 580 841 642 693 706 489 467 814 786 847 817 851
V6: Informed about
ﬂood risk
Corr 0.139** 0.052 0.105** 0.064
20.062 20.033 20.095* 20.049 20.103** 20.008 20.019 20.080* 20.117** 20.124** 20.187** 0.049
N 840 819 819 763 803 567 821 629 677 691 485 467 799 776 828 803 832
Resilience V7: Financial
damages
Corr 20.084* ,051 0.148** 0.200** 0.044 0.016 0.376** 0.209** 0.210** 0.396** 0.261** 0.272** 0.357** 0.248** 20.021 0.294** 20.229**
N 601 586 586 548 580 567 594 502 516 556 408 395 585 569 592 571 594
V8: Degree of overall
perceived Impact
Corr 20.049 0.078* 0.105** 0.051 0.039 20.038 0.618** 0.472** 0.419** 0.668** 0.468** 0.453** 0.547** 0.303** 0.046 0.204** 20.139**
N 880 854 854 802 841 821 594 657 708 725 502 481 835 806 867 837 872
V9: Perceived physical
and health effects
Corr 0.122** 0.193** 0.145** 0.129** 20.017 20.032 0.398** 0.542** 0.685** 0.458** 0.402** 0.378** 0.399** 0.334** 0.081* 0.254** 20.201**
N 670 653 653 610 642 629 502 657 632 623 474 457 657 634 661 638 663
V10: Perceived
mental effects
Corr 0.082* 0.071 0.073 0.125** 0.013 20.013 0.391** 0.493** 0.687** 0.433** 0.420** 0.419** 0.362** 0.338** 0.046 0.243** 20.209**
N 722 704 704 655 693 677 516 708 632 651 487 467 707 684 713 692 717
V11: Perceived damage to
the house/ﬂats/outbuildings
Corr 0.010 0.073 0.123** 0.070 0.030 20.009 0.633** 0.716** 0.453** 0.436** 0.514** 0.513** 0.598** 0.370** 0.080* 0.276** 20.118**
N 737 721 721 669 706 691 556 725 623 651 495 472 723 699 725 699 729
V12: Perceived loss
of valuables materials
(car, jewelry, etc.)
Corr 20.201** 2
0.046 20.018 20.107* 0.153** 20.025 0.352** 0.569** 0.401** 0.423** 0.531** 0.699** 0.434** 0.340** 0.065 0.109* 20.096*
N 510 501 501 465 489 485 408 502 474 487 495 446 501 488 504 488 507
V13: Perceived loss
of sentimental objects
(photos, souvenirs, etc.)
Corr 20.291** 20.060 20.070 20.084 0.175** 20.065 0.382** 0.529** 0.380** 0.419** 0.537** 0.702** 0.445** 0.322** 0.083 0.169** 20.159**
N 488 478 478 446 467 467 395 481 457 467 472 446 480 466 483 465 483
V14: Duration to recover Corr 0.018 0.079* 0.036 0.062 0.019 20.032 0.573** 0.588** 0.427** 0.396** 0.603** 0.451** 0.427** 0.402** 0.080* 0.228** 20.120**
N 852 830 830 775 814 799 585 835 657 707 723 501 480 805 839 812 844
V15: Change of household
situation after ﬂood
Corr 20.091** 20.071* 20.102** ,008 2,067 2,062 20.265** 2.0350** 20.325** 20.327** 20.373** 20.351** 20.324** 20.467** 0.076* 0.140** 20.023
N 822 803 803 745 786 776 569 806 634 684 699 488 466 805 810 783 814
Sociodemographic V16: Age of respondent Corr 0.160** 0.065 0.054 0.148** 20.002 20.058 20.026 0.024 0.071 0.030 .091* 0.053 0.080 .070* 2.080* 0.166** 20.054
N 889 860 860 804 847 828 592 867 661 713 725 504 483 839 810 852 885
V17:Tenure Corr 2
0.003 0.219** 0.302** 0.349** 20.095** 0.013 0.531** 0.266** 0.253** 0.236** 0.273** 0.119** 0.174** 0.224** 20.129** 0.160** 20.513**
N 859 831 831 776 817 803 571 837 638 692 699 488 465 812 783 852 857
V18: House type Corr 0.083* 20.084* 20.183** 20.221** 0.028 0.076* 20.348** 20.229** 20.202** 20.206** 20.128** 20.102* 20.164** 20.104** 0.015 20.046 20.505**
N 894 865 865 808 851 832 594 872 663 717 729 507 483 844 814 885 857
78 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 17]]
TABLE A2. Correlations (Corr) sample 2 households. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01. Signiﬁcant correlations are in bold.
Adaptation actions Resilience Sociodemographic Flood char.
Spearman V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8 V9 V10 V11 V12 V13 V14 V15 V16 V17 V18 V19 V20 V21
V1: Sum of
experienced
ﬂoods
Corr
N
Adaptation and
emergency
actions
V2: Adaptation
actions
Corr 0.093**
N 1421
V3: Constructional
adaptation actions
Corr 0.189** 0.417**
N 1414 1414
V4: Insurance Corr 0.071** 0.358** 0.283**
N 1383 1383 1380
V5: Emergency actions
during 2013 ﬂood
Corr 0.118** 0.096** 0.140** 0.089**
N 1431 1419 1412 1382
V6: Informed
about ﬂood risk
Corr 0.160** 0.369** 0.369** 0.235** 0.079**
N 1386 1386 1382 1366 1386
Resilience V7: Building damage Corr 20.016 0.014 20.029 0.041 0.057 0.033
N 848 844 840 828 847 827
V8: Damage to
household contents
Corr 20.070* 0.023 20.010 0.101** 0.097** 20.016 0.573**
N 846 840 834 826 846 822 547
V9: Perceived personal
strain due to
2013 ﬂood
Corr 0.051 0.008 0.051 0.091** 0.073* 0.026 0.313** 0.271**
N 1214 1206 1201 1178 1213 1178 764 741
V10: Perceived
building damage
Corr 20.047 0.015 0.021 0.018 0.027 0.007 0.458** 0.350** 0.389**
N 1282 1276 1270 1242 1281 1248 835 759 1112
V11: Perceived damage
to household
contents
Corr 20.150** 20.010 20.064* 0.030 20.008 20.032 0.348** 0.510** 0.320** 0.618**
N 1147 1139 1132 1111 1145 1114 680 827 997 1046
V12: Perceived health
effects
Corr 20.064 20.072 0.021 20.006 0.004 0.045 0.207** 0.129* 0.336** 0.422** 0.453**
N 603 598 595 584 603 584 382 364 601 572 510
V13: Perceived
stress and other
psychological stress
Corr 20.058* 20.023 20.038 0.049 0.063* 20.024 0.225** 0.200** 0.417** 0.358** 0.375** 0.474**
N 1193 1186 1181 1158 1192 1158 753 732 1189 1091 983 578
V14: Perceived stress
other ﬁnancial losses
Corr 20.137** 20.059 20.107** 0.011 20.023 20.030 0.233** 0.277** 0.281** 0.450** 0.551** 0.532** 0.354**
N 847 840 836 818 847 824 553 554 777 816 773 464 762
V15: Perceived loss
of sentimental objects
Corr 20.196** 20.072* 20.155** 20.046 20.012 20.081* 0.284** 0.350** 0.323** 0.418** 0.565** 0.570** 0.384** 0.521**
N 757 752 748 732 757 735 461 541 691 704 717 426 682 582
Sociodemographic V16: Age Corr 0.100** 20.074** 20.081** 20.005 20.044 20.102** 20.089* 20.101** 0.102** 20.010 20.001 0.033 0.006 20.033 0.005
N 1328 1318 1314 1285 1326 1285 807 796 1134 1194 1064 545 1113 771 682
V17: Gender Corr 20.057* 20.005 0.001 0.020 20.008 20.030 0.057 0.041 0.126** 0.102** 0.055 0.064 0.131** 0.090** 0.062 0.002
N 1433 1421 1414 1383 1431 1386 848 846 1214 1282 1147 603 1193 847 757 1328
V18: Tenure Corr 20.003 0.141** 0.210** 0.177** 0.130** 0.085** 20.033 0.355** 0.105** 0.122** 0.122** 20.051 0.043 0.087* 0.037
20.004 20.060*
N 1433 1421 1414 1383 1431 1386 848 846 1214 1282 1147 603 1193 847 757 1328 1433
V19: Building type Corr 0.020 20.082** 20.102** 20.103** 20.090** 20.061* 0.095** 20.267** 20.125** 2,117** 20.137** 20.055 20.104** 20.189** 2,077* 0.038 0.009 20.491**
N 1428 1416 1409 1379 1426 1382 846 845 1210 1277 1142 599 1189 843 754 1324 1428 1428
Flood
characteristics
V20: Water level Corr 0.110** 0.018 0.023 0.019 0.086** 0.055* 0.570** 0.436** 0.223** 0.306** 0.235** 0.138** 0.161** 0.142** 0.153** 20.046 20.024 20.026 0.037
N 1339 1328 1321 1297 1338 1297 812 809 1139 1203 1079 567 1119 794 713 1248 1339 1339 1335
V21: Flood duration Corr 20.025 0.010 0.000 0.037 0.042 0.012 0.056 0.053 0.083** 0.032 0.081** 0.056 0.064* 0.140** 0.151** 0.071* 0.105** 0.023 20.123** 20.080**
N 1330 1318 1311 1288 1328 1289 798 800 1126 1197 1069 558 1106 788 706 1238 1330 1330 1325 1264
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 79
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 18]]
TABLE A3. Correlations (Corr) sample 3 companies. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01. Signiﬁcant correlations are in bold.
Adaptation actions Resilience Sociodemographic Flood char.
Spearman V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8 V9 V10 V11 V12 V13 V14 V15 V16 V17 V18 V19 V20 V21
V1: Sum of
experienced ﬂoods
Corr
N
Adaptation and
emergency
actions
V2: Adaptation actions Corr 0.093**
N 1421
V3: Constructional
adaptation actions
Corr 0.189** 0.417**
N 1414 1414
V4: Insurance Corr 0.071** 0.358** 0.283**
N 1383 1383 1380
V5: Emergency actions
during 2013 ﬂood
Corr 0.118** 0.096** 0.140** 0.089**
N 1431 1419 1412 1382
V6: Informed
about ﬂood risk
Corr 0.160** 0.369** 0.369** 0.235** 0.079**
N 1386 1386 1382 1366 1386
Resilience V7: Building damage Corr 20.016 0.014 20.029 0.041 0.057 0.033
N 848 844 840 828 847 827
V8: Damage to
household contents
Corr 20.070* 0.023 20.010 0.101** 0.097** 20.016 0.573**
N 846 840 834 826 846 822 547
V9: Perceived personal
strain due to
2013 ﬂood
Corr 0.051 0.008 0.051 0.091** 0.073* 0.026 0.313** 0.271**
N 1214 1206 1201 1178 1213 1178 764 741
V10: Perceived
building damage
Corr 20.047 0.015 0.021 0.018 0.027 0.007 0.458** 0.350** 0.389**
N 1282 1276 1270 1242 1281 1248 835 759 1112
V11: Perceived damage
to household contents
Corr 20.150** 20.010 20.064* 0.030 20.008 20.032 0.348** 0.510** 0.320** 0.618**
N 1147 1139 1132 1111 1145 1114 680 827 997 1046
V12: Perceived
health effects
Corr 20.064 20.072 0.021 20.006 0.004 0.045 0.207** 0.129* 0.336** 0.422** 0.453**
N 603 598 595 584 603 584 382 364 601 572 510
V13: Perceived stress
and other
psychological stress
Corr 20.058* 20.023 20.038 0.049 0.063* 20.024 0.225** 0.200** 0.417** 0.358** 0.375** 0.474**
N 1193 1186 1181 1158 1192 1158 753 732 1189 1091 983 578
V14: Perceived stress
other ﬁnancial losses
Corr 20.137** 20.059 20.107** 0.011 20.023 20.030 0.233** 0.277** 0.281** 0.450** 0.551** 0.532** 0.354**
N 847 840 836 818 847 824 553 554 777 816 773 464 762
V15: Perceived loss
of sentimental objects
Corr 20.196** 20.072* 20.155** 20.046 20.012 20.081* 0.284** 0.350** 0.323** 0.418** 0.565** 0.570** 0.384** 0.521**
N 757 752 748 732 757 735 461 541 691 704 717 426 682 582
Sociodemographic V16: Age Corr 0.100** 20.074** 20.081** 20.005 20.044 20.102** 20.089* 20.101** 0.102** 20.010 20.001 0.033 0.006 20.033 0.005
N 1328 1318 1314 1285 1326 1285 807 796 1134 1194 1064 545 1113 771 682
V17: Gender Corr 20.057* 20.005 0.001 0.020 20.008 20.030 0.057 0.041 0.126** 0.102** 0.055 0.064 0.131** 0.090** 0.062 0.002
N 1433 1421 1414 1383 1431 1386 848 846 1214 1282 1147 603 1193 847 757 1328
V18: Tenure Corr 20.003 0.141** 0.210** 0.177** 0.130** 0.085** 20.033 0.355** 0.105** 0.122** 0.122** 20.051 0.043 0.087* 0.037 20.004 2
0.060*
N 1433 1421 1414 1383 1431 1386 848 846 1214 1282 1147 603 1193 847 757 1328 1433
V19: Building type Corr 0.020 20.082** 20.102** 20.103** 20.090** 20.061* 0.095** 20.267** 20.125** 20.117** 20.137** 20.055 20.104** 20.189** 20.077* 0.038 0.009 20.491**
N 1428 1416 1409 1379 1426 1382 846 845 1210 1277 1142 599 1189 843 754 1324 1428 1428
Flood characteristics V20: Water level Corr 0.110** 0.018 0.023 0.019 0.086** 0.055* 0.570** 0.436** 0.223** 0.306** 0.235** 0.138** 0.161** 0.142** 0.153** 20.046 20.024 20.026 0.037
N 1339 1328 1321 1297 1338 1297 812 809 1139 1203 1079 567 1119 794 713 1248 1339 1339 1335
V21: Flood duration Corr 20.025 0.010 0.000 0.037 0.042 0.012 0.056 0.053 0.083** 0.032 0.081** 0.056 0.064* 0.140** 0.151** 0.071* 0.105** 0.023 20.123** 20.080**
N 1330 1318 1311 1288 1328 1289 798 800 1126 1197 1069 558 1106 788 706 1238 1330 1330 1325 1264
80 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 19]]
health-related consequences. Therefore, the establishment
of evidence-based resilience baselines is needed in order to
understand whether the redistribution of responsibility to
the individual level would have the desired effects (i.e., an
increase in individual resilience) or whether the capacity of
individuals is limited to increase their resilience.
Second, our ﬁndings suggest that greater efforts
should be undertaken to better understand the re-
lationship between adaptation and resilience. Previous
research has often focused on the factors that shape
people’s motivation to invest in property-level adapta-
tion measures. The implementation of adaptation mea-
sures is usually equated to an increase in households’ or
companies’ resilience. Our ﬁndings at least question this
simple, linear relationship (correlation) and hint at a
positive, but by far more complicated and nonlinear
relation. The reasons for this are manifold. Property-
level adaptation measures often have a design level that
might be overtopped by a ﬂood and to be effective
they need to be properly in place before premises are
ﬂooded; if homeowners (or employees) are not available
or not capable of installing the measure in time, then the
measure cannot fulﬁll its full potential. In addition, the
effects of adaptation measures to reduce nonmonetary
consequences are probably not as signiﬁcant as one
would expect. However, in order to better understand
these effects more research is required to assess the re-
lation between adaptation/emergency actions and re-
silience in a more systematic manner.
Third, more research is needed on the framing effects
and how they shape respondents’ answers in survey-
based research. We attribute some of the differences in
our ﬁndings, particularly with regard to health-related
and psychological consequences, but also with respect to
the greater perceived severity of the third ﬂood event,
to the way we addressed households’ ﬂood experience in
the survey. While sample 2 households focused on the
2013 ﬂood and addressed prior ﬂood experience just as a
lumped variable, sample 1 households focused on all
ﬂoods experienced since 2002. Respondents were asked
to report detailed about the consequences of each ﬂood
event they experience chronologically. This means that
TABLE A4. Linear and logistic regressions of adaptive and emergency actions sample 1 households. DV: dependent variable. Note:
* p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Model B Wald Cox and Snell R2 Nagelkerkes R2
1 DV: Adaptation actions 0.068 0.115
Age 20.001 0.029
Tenure 0.916** 22.931
Building—single 0.030 0.013
Building—semidetached 0.258 0.593
Building—apartment 20.051 0.038
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.601** 30.151
2 DV: Constructional adaptation actions 0.141 0.233
Age 20.003 0.150
Tenure 2.214** 31.955
Building—single 0.226 0.545
Building—semidetached 0.439 1.135
Building—apartment 20.309 0.807
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.744** 27.695
3 DV: Insurance 0.158 0.211
Age 0.006 1.419
Tenure 1.138** 30.968
Building—single 0.020 0.005
Building—semidetached 20.657 3.533
Building—apartment 20.659 5.744
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.514** 19.552
Model BT R
2 Adjusted R2
4 DV: Sum of emergency measures
during 2013 ﬂood
0.128 0.122
Age 20.023** 25.947
Tenure 0.828** 5.691
Building—single 20.404 22.100
Building—semidetached 20.435 21.719
Building—apartment 20.324 21.672
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.583** 7.203
J
ANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 81
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 20]]
if the 2013 ﬂood was experienced as the third ﬂood event
by households, then they had to answer several ques-
tions about previous ﬂoods before turning their atten-
tion to the 2013 ﬂood. In this sense, sample 1 households
primed the cumulative ﬂood experience of house-
holds. Although our results hint at possible priming ef-
fects, more experimental research is needed to better
understand how the framing/cognitive processing of
TABLE A5. Regressions of adaptive and emergency actions sample 2 households. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Model BT R 2 Adjusted R2
1 DV: Adaptation actions 0.027 0.024
Tenure 0.053** 4.411
Age 20.001* 22.509
Building 0.001 0.096
Sum ﬂood experience 0.012* 2.001
2 DV: Constructional adaptation actions 0.087 0.084
Tenure 0.142** 7.232
Age 20.004** 23.884
Building 0.009 0.517
Sum ﬂood experience 0.067** 6.750
3 DV: Insurance 0.034 0.031
Tenure 0.111** 5.264
Age 0.000 0.037
Building 20.012 20.622
Sum ﬂood experience 0.011 1.043
4 DV: Emergency actions during 2013 ﬂood 0.036 0.033
Tenure 0.041** 4.062
Age 20.001* 21.981
Building 20.012 21.273
Sum ﬂood experience 0.018** 3.649
TABLE A6. Linear and logistic regressions of adaptive and emergency actions sample 3 companies. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Model BT R 2 Adjusted R2
1 DV: Adaptation actions 0.126 0.111
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.221** 2.906
Size 0.013 0.323
Sector 20.221* 22.147
Spatial situation 20.091 20.747
Ownership 0.803** 3.378
2 DV: Constructional adaptation actions 0.063 0.048
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.057* 1.845
Size 0.004 0.229
Sector 20.065 21.546
Spatial situation 20.077 21.537
Ownership 0.137 1.401
3 DV: Number of emergency measures 0.080 0.056
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.164 21.945
Size 0.031 0.682
Sector 20.102 20.831
Spatial situation 20.424** 0.3.040
Ownership 20.352 21.359
Model Wald Z Cox and Snell R
2 Nagelkerkes R2
4 DV: Insurance 0.029 0.041
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.006 20.071
Size 20.004 20.074
Sector 20.112 20.901
Spatial situation 20.063 20.427
Ownership 0.603* 2.104
82 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 21]]
TABLE A7. Regressions of resilience sample 1 households. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Model BT R 2 Adjusted R2
1 DV: Financial damage 0.34 0.33
Age 20.002 20.790
Tenure 0.815 9.774
Building—single 0.174 1.654
Building—semidetached 0.127 0.984
Building—apartment 20.243 22.262
Sum of ﬂood experience 21.117** 24.227
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.264** 3.874
Constructional adaptation actions 20.028 20.339
2 DV: Perceived overall consequences 0.14 0.13
Age 0.001 0.348
Tenure 0.573 4.078
Building—single 0.064 0.343
Building—semidetached 0.648 2.709
Building—apartment 20.326 21.752
Sum of ﬂood experience 22.029** 24.521
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.524** 4.553
Constructional adaptation actions 20.017 20.114
3 DV: Perceived damage to house/ﬂat 0.11 0.10
Age 0.005 1.273
Tenure 0.728** 5.318
Building—single 20.119 20.668
Building—semidetached 0.090 0.404
Building—apartment 20.124 20.694
Sum of ﬂood experience 21.747** 24.033
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.458** 4.116
Constructional adaptation actions 0.152 1.069
4 DV: Perceived health-related consequences 0.11 0.10
Age 0.004 0.904
Tenure 0.441 2.873
Building—single 0.156 0.801
Building—semidetached 20.158 20.643
Building—apartment 20.424* 22.150
Sum of ﬂood experience 21.022* 22.131
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.032** 2.686
Constructional adaptation actions 0.032 0.205
5 DV: Perceived stress-related consequences 0.09 0.07
Age 0.001 0.162
Tenure** 0.471 3.286
Building—single 0.078 0.418
Building—semidetached 20.108 20.446
Building—apartment 20.450* 22.401
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.303 20.674
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.121 1.051
Constructional adaptation actions 20.172 21.137
6 DV: Perceived loss of material objects 0.07 0.06
Age 0.008 1.722
Tenure 0.283 1.619
Building—single 0.074 0.331
Building—semidetached 0.259 0.956
Building—apartment 20.020 20.087
Sum of ﬂood experience 22.074** 23.687
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.461** 3.151
Constructional adaptation actions 20.138 20.767
7 DV: Perceived loss of sentimental objects 0.16 0.15
Age 0.012* 2.378
Tenure 0.437* 2.194
Building—single 0.364 1.484
Building—semidetached 0.440 1.454
Building—apartment 0.034 0.134
Sum of ﬂood experience 23.081** 24.863
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.658** 3.963
Constructional adaptation actions 20.489* 22.369
8 DV: Duration to recover 0.08 0.07
Age 0.004 1.234
Tenure 0.687** 4.848
Building—single 20.176 20.925
Building—semidetached 0.066 0.273
Building—apartment 20.235 21.244
Sum of ﬂood experience 21.684** 23.785
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.459** 4.021
Constructional adaptation actions 20.276 21.832
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 83
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 22]]
TABLE A8. Regressions of resilience sample 2 households. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Model BT R 2 Adjusted R2
1 DV: Log. ﬁnancial damage to building 0.019 0.012
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.023 0.197
Sum of ﬂood experience 2 20.015 20.552
Age 20.009* 22.114
Tenure 0.015 0.073
Building type 0.216** 2.814
Constructional adaptation action 20.162 21.305
2 DV: Log. Financial damage to household content 0.180 0.174
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.078 20.707
Sum of ﬂood experience 2 0.016 0.624
Age 20.011** 22.819
Tenure 0.655** 8.287
Building type 20.252** 23.369
Constructional adaptation action 20.346** 23.046
3 DV: Perceived personal strain due to 2013 ﬂood 0.039 0.034
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.200 1.815
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 20.037 21.494
Age 0.015** 3.912
Tenure 0.137 1.648
Building type 20.220** 23.022
Constructional adaptation action 0.136 1.200
4 DV: Perceived damage to building 0.022 0.017
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.072 20.751
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.011 0.493
Age 0.001 0.179
Tenure 0.184* 2.375
Building type 20.171** 22.660
Constructional adaptation action 0.024 0.236
5 DV: Perceived damage to household contents 0.046 0.041
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.323** 22.912
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.043 1.681
Age 0.002 0.586
Tenure 0.151 1.869
Building type 20.224** 22.968
Constructional adaptation action 20.290* 22.510
6 DV: Perceived health-related consequences 0.025 0.014
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.251 21.398
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 0.042 1.091
Age 0.009 1.472
Tenure 20.412** 22.972
Building type 20.273* 22.319
Constructional adaptation action 0.172 0.922
7 DV: Perceived stress-related consequences 0.017 0.011
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.132 21.308
Sum of ﬂood experience 2 0.022 0.956
Age 0.000 0.039
Tenure 0.014 0.185
Building type 20.213** 23.163
Constructional adaptation action 20.139 21.319
8 DV: Loss of sentimental objects 0.058 0.050
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.473** 22.961
Sum of ﬂood experience 2 0.069 1.918
Age 0.005 0.934
Tenure 20.005 20.046
Building type 20.183 21.687
Constructional adaptation action 20.620** 23.773
84 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 23]]
previous ﬂood events (in surveys) translates into ap-
praisals of these events. For example, experimental
designs that manipulate respondents’ processing of ﬂood-
related information (i.e., the time given to think about
previous ﬂood events or the number of questions asked
about previous events) may provide an opportunity to
investigate such framing effects more systematically.
Finally, more comparative research is needed. Com-
paring case studies in order to generate converging evi-
dence or discrepancies across the three samples was only
possible as we shared some of the theoretical constructs.
We are convinced that more systematic comparisons
across case studies is necessary, which requires researchers
to agree upon, share, and apply some basic theoretical
constructs and their operationalization across different case
studies. Future research, however, might also use modera-
tor analysis (as a part of meta-analysis) to investigate pos-
sible boundary conditions of (our) research ﬁndings.
6. Summary and conclusions
The key question addressed in this paper was whether
the resilience of households and companies increases or
decreases as a consequence of multiple ﬂood experi-
ences and how this is inﬂuenced by respondents’ emer-
gency and adaptation actions. Our analysis shows robust
TABLE A9. Regressions of resilience sample 3 companies. Note: * p , 0.05; ** p , 0.01.
Model BT R 2 Adjusted R2
1 DV: Financial damage to building 0.099 0.057
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.014 20.039
Sum of ﬂood experience 2 20.001 20.027
Size 0.181** 3.371
Sector 20.067 20.487
Spatial situation 20.155 21.025
Ownership 20.299 21.007
General adaptation action 0.015 0.221
2 DV: Financial damage to equipment 0.137 0.099
Sum of ﬂood experience 20.182 20.528
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 20.000 20.013
Size 0.157** 3.532
Sector 20.283* 22.361
Spatial situation 0.095 0.672
Ownership 0.313 1.121
General adaptation action 0.039 0.604
3 DV: Financial damage to goods and stocks 0.195 0.146
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.135 0.380
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 20.040 20.757
Size 0.117* 2.378
Sector 20.288* 22.209
Spatial situation 20.388* 22.550
Ownership 20.443 21.455
General adaptation action 0.096 1.478
4 DV: Financial damages due to business interruption 0.183 0.152
Sum of ﬂood experience 0.270 0.956
Sum of ﬂood experience
2 20.028 20.654
Size 0.208** 5.400
Sector 20.100 21.003
Spatial situation 20.122 21.057
Ownership 20.406 21.782
General adaptation action 0.031 0.594
5 DV: Business interruption in days 0.058 0.022
Sum of ﬂood experience 19.026 1.050
Sum of ﬂood experience 2 21.597 20.582
Size 22.365 20.960
Sector 26.167 20.971
Spatial situation 10.387 1.401
Ownership 26.738 20.460
General adaptation action 3.390 1.015
J
ANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 85
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 24]]
evidence for a positive relationship between ﬂood ex-
perience and the adoption of adaptation and emergency
measures across all three samples. The relationship
between ﬂood experience and resilience is not as
straightforward: The effect of multiple ﬂood experiences
depends upon the aspects of resilience that one is fo-
cusing on (i.e., ﬁnancial losses, the subjective perception
of such losses or perceived psychological and health-
related impacts) as well as on the number of ﬂoods ex-
perienced. While our ﬁndings suggest that the resilience
of households increases from the ﬁrst to the second
ﬂood, the third ﬂood event seems to be a tipping point:
households’ ability to withstand damage to immobile
objects decreases as does their ability to withstand negative
psychological and health-related consequences. Our ﬁnd-
ings furthermore suggest in this respect that multiple ﬂood
experiences are a burden for affected households. Simi-
larly, companies’ resilience in terms of their ability to
withstand direct ﬁnancial losses increases when they have
experienced multiple ﬂood events, particularly with regard
to mobile goods and equipment. However, companies also
have some difﬁculties recovering from the ﬂood event and
reassuming their preﬂood state of business if they have
experienced multiple ﬂood events. However, there are
clear differences between samples that cannot easily be
explained by the data.
We therefore conclude that while it is relevant and
politically desirable to establish evidence-based resil-
ience baselines for households and companies, it seems
equally relevant to be more consistent when deﬁning
and operationalizing resilience in quantitative studies
and to have a better methodological understanding of
the effects from how ﬂood experience is framed in sur-
veys as well as how sampling and screening procedures
affect respondents’ answers. As the results of this study
indicate, following diverse sets of sampling and framing
approaches can be very positive, particularly if results
point to similar patterns, even when they have relied on
different sampling and framing strategies. However, dif-
ferences in the results of empirical research also need to be
better understood and assessed as to whether they can be
explained by the underlying methodology. If this challenge
is ignored, there is the risk of both overestimation and
misrepresentation of the effectiveness of property-level
adaptation on the resilience of households and companies.
APPENDIX
Correlation Tables and Results of the
Regression Analysis
The appendix shows the results of the correlation as
well as of the regression analysis ( Tables A1–A9).
REFERENCES
Adger, W. N., 2000: Social and ecological resilience: Are they re-
lated? Prog. Hum. Geogr., 24, 347–364, https://doi.org/10.1191/
030913200701540465.
Ahern, M., R. S. Kovats, P. Wilkinson, R. Few, and F. Matthies,
2005: Global health impacts of ﬂoods: Epidemiologic evi-
dence. Epidemiol. Rev. , 27, 36–46, https://doi.org/10.1093/
epirev/mxi004.
Alderman, K., L. R. Turner, and S. Tong, 2012: Floods and human
health: A systematic review. Environ. Int. , 47, 37–47, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2012.06.003.
Alexander, D. E., 2013: Resilience and disaster risk reduction: An
etymological journey. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. , 13, 2707–
2716, https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-13-2707-2013.
Begg, C., G. Walker, and C. Kuhlicke, 2015: Localism and ﬂood risk
management in England: The creation of new inequalities?En-
viron. Plann., 33C, 685–702, https://doi.org/10.1068/c12216.
——, M. Ueberham, T. Masson, and C. Kuhlicke, 2017: In-
teractions between citizen responsibilization, ﬂood experience
and household resilience: Insights from the 2013 ﬂood in
Germany. Int. J. Water Resour. Dev. , 33, 591–608, https://
doi.org/10.1080/07900627.2016.1200961.
Berkes, F., 2007: Understanding uncertainty and reducing vulner-
ability: Lessons from resilience thinking. Nat. Hazards , 41,
283–295, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-006-9036-7.
Bonanno, G. A., C. R. Brewin, K. Kaniasty, and A. M. L. Greca,
2010: Weighing the costs of disaster: Consequences, risks, and
resilience in individuals, families, and communities. Psy-
chol. Sci. Public Interest , 11, 1–49, https://doi.org/10.1177/
1529100610387086 .
Brand, F. S., and K. Jax, 2007: Focusing the meaning(s) of resil-
ience: Resilience as a descriptive concept and a boundary
object.Ecol. Soc., 12,2 3 ,https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-02029-120123.
Bubeck, P., W. J. W. Botzen, and J. C. J. H. Aerts, 2012a: A review
of risk perceptions and other factors that inﬂuence ﬂood mit-
igation behavior. Risk Anal. , 32, 1481–1495, https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1539-6924.2011.01783.x.
——, ——, H. Kreibich, and J. C. J. H. Aerts, 2012b: Long-term
development and effectiveness of private ﬂood mitigation
measures: An analysis for the German part of the river Rhine.
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. , 12, 3507–3518, https://doi.org/
10.5194/nhess-12-3507-2012.
——, A. Otto, and J. Weichselgartner, 2017: Societal impacts of
ﬂood hazards. Oxford Research Encyclopedia on Natural
Hazards Science , Oxford University Press, https://doi.org/
10.1093/acrefore/9780199389407.013.281.
Chinh, D. T., P. Bubeck, N. V. Dung, and H. Kreibich, 2016: The
2011 ﬂood event in the Mekong Delta: Preparedness, re-
sponse, damage and recovery of private households and small
businesses. Disasters, 40, 753–778, https://doi.org/10.1111/
disa.12171.
Cote, M., and A. J. Nightingale, 2012: Resilience thinking meets
social theory. Prog. Hum. Geogr., 36, 475–489, https://doi.org/
10.1177/0309132511425708.
Cutter, S. L., L. Barnes, M. Berry, C. Burton, E. Evans, E. Tate, and
J. Webb, 2008: A place-based model for understanding com-
munity resilience to natural disasters. Global Environ. Change,
18, 598–606, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.07.013.
DKKV, 2003: Hochwasservorsorge in Deutschland—Lernen aus
der Katastrophe 2002 im Elbegebiet (Flood prevention in
Germany—Learning from the 2002 catastrophe in the Elbe area).
Deutsches Komitee für Katastrophenvorsorge e.V., 152 pp.
86 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 25]]
——, 2015: Das Hochwasser im Juni 2013: Bew ährungsprobe f ür
das Hochwasserrisikomanagement in Deutschland (The ﬂood
in June 2013: A test for ﬂood risk management in Germany).
DKKV Series 53, 207 pp.
Fekete, A., G. Hufschmidt, and S. Kruse, 2014: Beneﬁts and
challenges of resilience and vulnerability for disaster risk
management. Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci. , 5, 3–20, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s13753-014-0008-3.
Felgentreff, C., 2003: Post-disaster situations as ‘‘window of op-
portunity’’? Post-ﬂood perceptions and changes in the German
Odra River region after the 1997 ﬂood.Erde, 134, 163–180.
Fernandez, A., J. Black, M. Jones, L. Wilson, L. Salvador-Carulla,
T. Astell-Burt, and D. Black, 2015: Flooding and mental
health: A systematic mapping review. PLOS ONE , 10,
e0119929, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0119929.
Fisher, L., 2015: Disaster responses: More than 70 ways to show
resilience. Nature, 518, 35–35, https://doi.org/10.1038/518035a.
Folke, C., S. Carpenter, T. Elmqvist, L. Gunderson, C. S. Holling,
and B. Walker, 2002: Resilience and sustainable development:
Building adaptive capacity in a world of transformations. Am-
bio, 31, 437–440, https://doi.org/10.1579/0044-7447-31.5.437.
Gallopín, G. C., 2006: Linkages between vulnerability, resilience,
and adaptive capacity. Global Environ. Change , 16, 293–303,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.02.004.
Gotham, K. F., R. Campanella, K. Lauve-Moon, and B. Powers,
2018: Hazard experience, geophysical vulnerability, and ﬂood
risk perceptions in a postdisaster city, the case of New Orleans.
Risk Anal., 38, 345–356, https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12830.
Greenberg, M. R., and M. D. Weiner, 2014: Keeping surveys valid,
reliable, and useful: A tutorial. Risk Anal. , 34, 1362–1375,
https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12250.
Grimm, V., and C. Wissel, 1997: Babel, or the ecological stability
discussions: An inventory and analysis of terminology and a
guide for avoiding confusion. Oecologia, 109, 323–334, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s004420050090.
Grothmann, T., and F. Reusswig, 2006: People at risk of ﬂooding:
Why some residents take precautionary action while others do
not. Nat. Hazards, 38, 101–120, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-
005-8604-6.
Hirabayashi, Y., R. Mahendran, S. Koirala, L. Konoshima,
D. Yamazaki, S. Watanabe, H. Kim, and S. Kanae, 2013:
Global ﬂood risk under climate change.
Nat. Climate Change,
3, 816–821, https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1911.
Holling, C. S., 1973: Resilience and stability of ecological systems.
Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. , 4, 1–23, https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.es.04.110173.000245.
Hudson, P., W. J. W. Botzen, J. K. Poussin, and J. C. J. H. Aerts,
2019: The impacts of ﬂooding and ﬂood preparedness on
subjective well-being: A monetisation of the tangible and in-
tangible impacts. J Happiness Stud. , 20, 665–682, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10902-017-9916-4.
Hutter, G., C. Kuhlicke, T. Glade, and C. Felgentreff, 2013: Natural
hazards and resilience: Exploring institutional and organiza-
tional dimensions of social resilience. Nat. Hazards , 67, 1–6,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9901-x.
Jones, L., and T. Tanner, 2017: ‘Subjective resilience’: Using per-
ceptions to quantify household resilience to climate extremes
and disasters. Reg. Environ. Change , 17, 229–243, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10113-016-0995-2.
Jongman, B., P. J. Ward, and J. C. J. H. Aerts, 2012: Global ex-
posure to river and coastal ﬂooding: Long term trends and
changes. Global Environ. Change, 22, 823–835, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.07.004.
Joseph, R., D. Proverbs, and J. Lamond, 2015: Assessing the value
of intangible beneﬁts of property level ﬂood risk adaptation
(PLFRA) measures. Nat. Hazards , 79, 1275–1297, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11069-015-1905-5.
Kates, R. W., 1962: Hazard and choice perception in ﬂood
plain management. Department of Geography, University of
Chicago Research Paper 78, 157 pp.
K i e n z l e r ,S . ,I .P e c h ,H .K r e i b i c h ,M .Müller, and A. H. Thieken,
2015: After the extreme ﬂood in 2002: Changes in pre-
paredness, response and recovery of ﬂood-affected residents in
Germany between 2005 and 2011.Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci.,
15, 505–526, https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-15-505-2015.
Klein, O., L. Licata, and S. Pierucci, 2011: Does group identiﬁca-
tion facilitate or prevent collective guilt about past misdeeds?
Resolving the paradox. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. , 50, 563–572,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8309.2011.02028.x.
Kreibich, H., and A. H. Thieken, 2009: Coping with ﬂoods in the
city of Dresden, Germany. Nat. Hazards, 51, 423–436, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11069-007-9200-8.
——, ——, T. Petrow, M. M üller, and B. Merz, 2005: Flood loss
reduction of private households due to building precautionary
measures—Lessons learned from the Elbe ﬂood in August
2002. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci.
, 5, 117–126, https://doi.org/
10.5194/nhess-5-117-2005.
——, M. M üller, A. H. Thieken, and B. Merz, 2007: Flood pre-
caution of companies and their ability to cope with the ﬂood in
August 2002 in Saxony, Germany. Water Resour. Res. , 43,
W03408, https://doi.org/10.1029/2005WR004691.
——, I. Seifert, A. H. Thieken, E. Lindquist, K. Wagner, and
B. Merz, 2011: Recent changes in ﬂood preparedness of pri-
vate households and businesses in Germany. Reg. Environ.
Change, 11, 59–71, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-010-0119-3.
——, and Coauthors, 2014: Costing natural hazards. Nat. Climate
Change, 4, 303, https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2182.
——, P. Bubeck, M. Van Vliet, and H. De Moel, 2015: A review of
damage-reducing measures to manage ﬂuvial ﬂood risks in a
changing climate. Mitig. Adapt. Strategies Global Change , 20,
967–989, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-014-9629-5.
——, and Coauthors, 2017: Adaptation to ﬂood risk: Results of
international paired ﬂood event studies. Earth’s Future , 5,
953–965, https://doi.org/10.1002/2017EF000606.
Kuhlicke, C., 2010: The dynamics of vulnerability: Some pre-
liminary thoughts about the occurrence of ‘radical sur-
prises’ and a case study on the 2002 ﬂood (Germany). Nat.
Hazards , 55, 671–688, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-010-
9645-z .
——, 2013: Resilience: A capacity and a myth: Findings from an in-
depth case study in disaster management research. Nat. Haz-
ards, 67, 61–76, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-010-9646-y.
——, 2015: Vulnerability, ignorance and the experience of radical
surprises. Routledge International Handbook of Ignorance
Studies, M. Gro ß and L. McGoey, Eds., Routledge, 239–246.
——, 2019: Risk and resilience in the management and governance
of natural hazards. Oxford Research Encyclopedia on Natural
Hazards Science , Oxford University Press, https://doi.org/
10.1093/acrefore/9780199389407.013.299.
——, A. Scolobig, S. Tapsell, A. Steinf ührer, and B. De Marchi,
2011: Contextualizing social vulnerability: Findings from case
studies across Europe. Nat. Hazards , 58, 789–810, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9751-6.
Kundzewicz, Z. W., and Coauthors, 2014: Flood risk and climate
change: Global and regional perspectives. Hydrol. Sci. J. , 59,
1–28, https://doi.org/10.1080/02626667.2013.857411.
JANUARY 2020 K U H L I C K E E T A L . 87
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC


[[PAGE 26]]
Lamond, J., C. Rose, N. Bhattacharya-Mis, and R. Joseph, 2018:
Evidence review for property ﬂood resilience phase 2 report.
Flood Re and UWE Bristol, 60 pp., https://www.ﬂoodre.co.uk/
wp-content/uploads/UWE-report_Evidence-review-for-PFR_Phase-
2-report.pdf.
Lawrence, J., D. Quade, and J. Becker, 2014: Integrating the effects
of ﬂood experience on risk perception with responses to
changing climate risk. Nat. Hazards , 74, 1773–1794, https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11069-014-1288-z.
Masson, T., and M. Barth, 2019: Solving the paradox—(Further)
evidence for a quadratic relationship between in-group cen-
trality and group-based guilt. Br. J. Soc. Psychol., 58, 917–937,
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjso.12310.
Meyer, V., and Coauthors, 2013: Review article: Assessing the
costs of natural hazards—State of the art and knowledge gaps.
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. , 13, 1351–1373, https://doi.org/
10.5194/nhess-13-1351-2013.
Miller, J. W., W. R. Stromeyer, and M. A. Schwieterman, 2013:
Extensions of the Johnson-Neyman technique to linear
models with curvilinear effects: Derivations and analytical
tools. Multivar. Behav. Res. , 48, 267–300, https://doi.org/
10.1080/00273171.2013.763567.
Milly, P. C. D., J. Betancourt, M. Falkenmark, R. M. Hirsch, Z. W.
Kundzewicz, D. P. Lettenmaier, and R. J. Stouffer, 2008:
Stationarity is dead: Whither water management? Science,
319, 573–574, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1151915.
Ogunbode, C. A., Y. Liu, and N. Tausch, 2017: The moderating role
of political afﬁliation in the link between ﬂooding experience
and preparedness to reduce energy use. Climatic Change, 145,
445–458, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-2089-7.
Plapp, T., and U. Werner, 2006: Understanding risk perception
from natural hazards. Examples from Germany. RISK21—
Coping with Risks due to Natural Hazards in the 21st Century ,
W. J. Ammann, S. Dannenmann, and L. Vulliet, Eds., CRC
Press, 101–108.
Poussin, J. K., W. J. Wouter Botzen, and J. C. J. H. Aerts, 2015:
Effectiveness of ﬂood damage mitigation measures: Empirical
evidence from French ﬂood disasters.Global Environ. Change,
31, 74–84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.12.007.
Reiter, J., B. Wenzel, C. Dittmer, D. F. Lorenz, and M. Voss, 2018:
The 2013 ﬂood in the community of Elbe-Havel-Land in the
eyes of the population. Resear ch Rep. of the Quantitative
Survey, KFS Working Paper 08, 44 pp., https://refubium.fu-
berlin.de/bitstream/handle/fub188/21920/Working_paper_Elbe_
ﬂood_English_ﬁnal.pdf?sequence51.
Schröter, K., M. Kunz, F. Elmer, B. Mühr, and B. Merz, 2015: What
made the June 2013 ﬂood in Germany an exceptional event? A
hydro-meteorological evaluation. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. , 19,
309–327,
https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-19-309-2015.
Seifert, I., W. J. W. Botzen, H. Kreibich, and J. C. J. H. Aerts, 2013:
Inﬂuence of ﬂood risk characteristics on ﬂood insurance de-
mand: A comparison between Germany and the Netherlands.
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. , 13, 1691–1705, https://doi.org/
10.5194/nhess-13-1691-2013.
Seligman, M., and C. Peterson, 2001: Learned helplessness. Inter-
national Encyclopedia of Social & Behavioral Sciences , 1st ed.
Science Direct, 8583–8586.
Sieg, T., K. Vogel, B. Merz, and H. Kreibich, 2017: Tree-based
ﬂood damage modeling of companies: Damage processes and
model performance. Water Resour. Res. , 53, 6050–6068,
https://doi.org/10.1002/2017WR020784.
Siegrist, M., 2013: The necessity for longitudinal studies in risk
perception research. Risk Anal. , 33, 50–51, https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1539-6924.2012.01941.x.
——, 2014: Longitudinal studies on risk research. Risk Anal. , 34,
1376–1377, https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.12249.
Spence, A., W. Poortinga, C. Butler, and N. F. Pidgeon, 2011:
Perceptions of climate change and willingness to save energy
related to ﬂood experience. Nat. Climate Change , 1, 46–49,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1059.
Stein, D. J., S. Seedat, A. Iversen, and S. Wessely, 2007: Post-
traumatic stress disorder: Medicine and politics. Lancet, 369,
139–144, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60075-0.
Surminski, S., and A. H. Thieken, 2017: Promoting ﬂood
risk reduction: The role of insurance in Germany and
England. Earth’s Future , 5, 979–1001, https://doi.org/10.1002/
2017EF000587.
Tapsell, S. M., and S. M. Tunstall, 2008: ‘‘I wish I’d never heard of
Banbury’’: The relationship between ‘place’ and the health
impacts from ﬂooding. Health Place , 14, 133–154, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2007.05.006.
Thieken, A. H., H. Kreibich, M. Müller, and B. Merz, 2007: Coping
with ﬂoods: Preparedness, response and recovery of ﬂood-
affected residents in Germany in 2002. Hydrol. Sci. J. , 52,
1016–1037, https://doi.org/10.1623/hysj.52.5.1016.
——, S. Mariani, S. Longﬁeld, and W. Vanneuville, 2014: Preface:
Flood resilient communities—Managing the consequences of
ﬂooding. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. , 14, 33–39, https://
doi.org/10.5194/nhess-14-33-2014.
——, T. Bessel, S. Kienzler, H. Kreibich, M. M üller, S. Pisi, and
K. Schr
öter, 2016a: The ﬂood of June 2013 in Germany: How
much do we know about its impacts? Nat. Hazards Earth Syst.
Sci., 16, 1519–1540, https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-16-1519-2016.
——, and Coauthors, 2016b: Review of the ﬂood risk management
system in Germany after the major ﬂood in 2013. Ecol. Soc.,
21, 51, https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-08547-210251.
——, H. Kreibich, M. Müller, and J. Lamond, 2017: Data collection
for a better understanding of what causes ﬂood damage—
Experiences with telephone surveys. Flood Damage Survey
and Assessment: New Insights from Research and Practice ,D .
Molinari, S. Menoni, and F. Ballio, Eds., Wiley, 95–106.
van Valkengoed, A. M., and L. Steg , 2019: Meta-analyses of factors
motivating climate change adaptation behaviour. Nat. Climate
Change, 9, 158–163, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0371-y.
Wachinger, G., O. Renn, C. Begg, and C. Kuhlicke, 2013: The risk
perception paradox: Implications for governance and com-
munication of natural hazards. Risk Anal. , 33, 1049–1065,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2012.01942.x.
Walker, B. H., C. S. Holling, S. R. Carpenter, and A. Kinzig, 2004: Re-
silience, adaptability and transformability in social-ecological sys-
tems.Ecol. Soc., 9,5 , https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-00650-090205.
Walker-Springett, K., C. Butler, and W. N. Adger, 2017: Wellbeing
in the aftermath of ﬂoods. Health Place , 43, 66–74, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2016.11.005.
Weichselgartner, J., and I. Kelman, 2015: Geographies of resil-
ience: Challenges and opportunities of a descriptive concept.
P r o g .H u m .G e o g r ., 39, 249–267, https://doi.org/10.1177/
0309132513518834 .
Zaalberg, R., C. Midden, A. Meijnders, and T. McCalley, 2009:
Prevention, adaptation, and threat denial: Flooding experi-
ences in the Netherlands. Risk Anal. , 29, 1759–1778, https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2009.01316.x.
88 WEATHER, CLIMATE, AND SOCIETY V OLUME 12
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 03/12/25 12:02 PM UTC
