[[PAGE 1]]
 
The Geographical Journal
 
, Vol. 
 
173
 
, No. 4, December 2007, pp. 374–390
 
Geographical Journal
 
 Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
0016-7398/07/0002-0001/$00.20/0  © 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
 
Natural and imposed injustices: the challenges 
in implementing ‘fair’ flood risk management 
policy in England
 
CLARE JOHNSON, EDMUND PENNING-ROWSELL AND DENNIS PARKER
 
Flood Hazard Research Centre, School of Health and Social Science, Middlesex University, 
Queensway, Enfield EN3 4SA
E-mails: c.johnson@mdx.ac.uk; e.penning-rowsell@mdx.ac.uk; d.parker@mdx.ac.uk
 
This paper was accepted for publication in September 2007
 
This paper examines the challenges facing English flood risk management (FRM) policy
and practice when considering 
 
fair
 
 decision-making processes and outcomes at a range
of spatial scales. It is recognised that flooding is not fair 
 
per se
 
: the inherent natural
spatial inequality of flood frequency and extent, plus the legacy of differential system
interventions, being the cause. But, drawing on the three social justice models –
procedural equality, Rawls’ maximin rule and maximum utility – the authors examine the
 
fairness 
 
principles currently employed in FRM decision-making. This is achieved, firstly,
in relation to the distribution of taxpayer’s money for FRM at the national, regional and
local levels and, secondly, for non-structural strategies – most notably those of insurance,
flood warnings and awareness raising, land use control, home owner adaptation and
emergency management. A case study of the Lower Thames catchment illustrates the
challenges facing decision-makers in ‘real life’: how those strategies which appear to be
most technically and economically effective fall far short of being 
 
fair
 
 from either a
vulnerability or equality perspective. The paper concludes that if we are to manage flood
risk somewhat more 
 
fairly
 
 then a move in the direction of government funding of
nationally consistent non-structural strategies, in conjunction with lower investment
decision thresholds for other local-level FRM options, appears to offer a greater
contribution to equality and vulnerability-based social justice principles than the status quo.
 
KEY WORDS
 
: England; flood risk management; fairness; social justice; equity; policy
 
Introduction
 
S
 
ince the major floods of 1998 and 2000, flood
risk management (FRM) in England has undergone
a significant change in ideology. This change
could not be more radical (Johnson 
 
et al.
 
 2004
2005), from a strategy dominated by urban, scheme-
specific flood defence [Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (MAFF) 1993] to one focused
on managing both flood probabilities and con-
sequences (Table 1). Almost everything is now
changing, from high-level strategy and decision
processes – as evidenced in 
 
Making space for water
 
(MSW) [Department for the Environment, Food
and Rural Affairs (Defra) 2004 2005a 2005b]
(Table 2) – to regional level planning processes, as
evidenced in the Environment Agency’s (EA) 
 
Strategy
for flood risk management 2003/4 to 2007/8
 
 (EA
2003a).
Whilst these changes are welcome, the practical
reality of implementing such strategies at a regional/
local level is proving more difficult. Similarly, the
embodiment of the principles of sustainability and
equity into policy goals has, as elsewhere in the
world of water politics (e.g. Gleick 1998; Wolf
1999; Boelens 1998; Syme 
 
et al.
 
 1999; Syme and
Nancarrow 2001; Tisdell 2003), unearthed a number
of questions about meaning, practical implementation
and whose definitions count as to what is 
 
just, fair
 
and 
 
equitable
 
.
Currently, some 1.8 million houses are exposed
to flood risk in England (Defra 2006a) with the

[[PAGE 2]]
 
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
 
375
 
Geographical Journal
 
 Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
 
management of this risk being funded largely by
the other 29.5 million tax payers (HM Revenue and
Customs 2006). This funding structure means that
any assessment of the 
 
fairness
 
 of decision processes
and outcomes must include not only those at risk
of flooding but also those providing the resources:
the taxpayer. In this respect, to date, it has been the
efficient use of taxpayer’s money that has been the
dominant factor guiding government decisions.
The question now, given the move from flood defence
to FRM plus the increased emphasis on issues of
sustainability and equity (Table 2), is whether the
current approach to FRM which prioritises the 
 
fair
 
distribution of taxpayer’s money on the grounds of
economic efficiency is the most appropriate model
of social justice to apply. Or, should decision-makers
be seeking a decision-making model which shifts
the focus away from 
 
fairness 
 
for taxpayers towards
a model that provides greater emphasis on the
 
fairness
 
 concerns of those at risk?
Table 1 Post-war flood policy in England and Wales
Belief system Land drainage (WWII–1970s) Flood defence (1980s–1990s) Flood risk management (2000s–)
Nature of 
humans
Humans have dominion over 
nature. Land is there for 
human use
Humans have dominion over nature 
(power and right to exercise it)
Humans are part of nature, not 
superior to it. Nature has intrinsic 
value
Priority of 
values
Priority on agricultural 
productivity and food security 
within the national economic 
context
Priority on economic growth, 
national security and welfare 
standards
Ecological and environmental 
values should be viewed on par 
with economic growth, national 
security and welfare standards
Fundamental 
policy position
To improve and protect 
agricultural land from flooding
To defend people and property from 
flooding
To manage flood risks equitably and 
in accordance with the principles of 
ecologically sustainable development
Basic policy 
mechanism
Investment in land drainage 
and rural flood defence
Investment in urban flood defence 
and flood alleviation schemes 
according to national priority criteria 
and economic appraisal processes
A focus on decisions that satisfy 
social and economic needs whilst 
maintaining the ecosystem 
enhancement
Source: Johnson et al. (2005)
Table 2 Key principles underlying the new approaches to flood and coastal erosion risk management
Managing risk from all sources of flooding which, in addition to coastal and fluvial flooding, also includes pluvial,
groundwater and sewer flooding. This is in accordance with the suggestions made in the Foresight programme (Evans
et al. 2004), and will require significant developments in our understanding and mapping of these risks and a clarification
of the roles and responsibilities of the various stakeholders involved.
Adopting a risk-driven, rather than a project-driven, approach to managing floods, requiring better and more
reliable information at the catchment scale as well as a greater understanding of the main drivers for increasing risk
Seeking multi-functional benefits from flood and coastal risk management interventions, particularly with respect to
water quality and water resources, consistent with the requirements of the Water Framework Directive
Considering a wide range of risk management options, and a wide range of techniques and decision-making
processes, to better account for the social and environmental consequences of flooding
Emphasizing the social pillar of sustainable development by extending the risk management tools such that flood
risk management decision processes take account of social justice and equity issues as required under the
government’s sustainable development and sustainable communities strategies (HM Government 2005)
Enhancing the clarity of the social and environmental consequences of flood and coastal erosion in the decision-
making process
Source: Penning-Rowsell et al. (2006)
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 3]]
 
376
 
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
 
Geographical Journal
 
 Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
 
Such a shift would require greater weight to be
given to issues of procedural equality and to addressing
the needs of those most vulnerable to flooding –
something which researchers in risks and hazards
have long since argued (e.g. Blaikie 
 
et al.
 
 1994;
Wisner 
 
et al.
 
 2004; Cutter 2006). Certainly the recent
upsurge in flood risk vulnerability and environmental
inequality research in England would suggest that
support for such a shift is gathering pace (Walker 
 
et
al.
 
 2003; Fielding and Burningham 2005; Fielding
 
et al.
 
 2005a 2005b; Burningham and Thrush 2001).
In line with this, the analysis in this paper is
concerned, firstly, with exploring the 
 
fairness
 
 principles
embodied in current policy and practice of FRM in
England. Secondly, given this reality, the paper
explores the technical and economic feasibility of
incorporating a greater emphasis on equality and
vulnerability in decision processes and outcomes.
To do so, the paper begins by providing a brief
overview of the vast literature on social justice,
simplifying the main threads of this thinking into
five different forms – each with its own conceptual-
isation of 
 
fair
 
 FRM. Focusing on those models
which appear to offer the greatest explanatory gain
in the FRM context – procedural equality, Rawls’
maximum rule and maximum utility – the paper
evaluates the extent to which the current system of
FRM adheres to the justice principles embodied
in these models at all levels of decision-making:
national processes, regional planning, and the local
(project) level. This requires an examination of the
implied criteria in government policy and guidance
as well as more project-specific decision rules. It
also requires the examination of the 
 
fairness
 
 criteria
employed in the implementation and management
of non-structural strategies. By way of illustration of
the complex realities of implementing FRM at the
local/regional level, the authors also use the ongoing
debates concerning the Lower Thames Strategy to
highlight some of the entrenched difficulties which
exist when thinking about 
 
fair 
 
FRM in ‘real life’.
 
A brief overview of issues of social justice
 
Almost all contemporary debates about social justice
depend on which of the principles of justice,
within some given geographic unit of society, are
regarded as necessary either for a 
 
fair
 
 distribution
of ‘goods’ and ‘bads’ (distributional justice) or a
 
fair
 
 decision-making process through which this
distribution comes about (procedural justice). Add
to this the important time dimension, which issues
of sustainability bring to bear, and an additional
element of complexity emerges: 
 
inter-generational
fairness
 
. This complexity is further compounded by
the varied language of discourse across philosophical
traditions, with issues of 
 
fairness, justice and equity
 
being used interchangeably often without any clear
definitional differentiation between the terms. For
clarity, discussions in this paper will be embedded
in the language of 
 
fairness
 
.
For simplicity of explanation, the five most influ-
ential philosophical traditions of social justice can
be categorised as 
 
utilitarianism, pluralism, egalitar-
ianism, libertarianism 
 
and 
 
Rawlsian
 
. Each of these
is founded on very different moral beliefs about
what makes society just. For 
 
utilitarians
 
 (e.g. Mill
1863) society is just if it maximises the total potential
happiness of society as a whole through the aggrega-
tion of individual happiness. For 
 
pluralists
 
 (e.g. Walzer
1983; Miller 1999) a multi-dimensional approach is
necessary which evaluates each of the ‘goods’ and
‘bads’ to be distributed, and the process through
which this should occur, according to its own
criteria and historical cultural particularism. For
 
egalitarians
 
 (e.g. Sen 1992), society is just provided
institutions ensure equality of opportunity in the
distribution of resources across society and the
treatment of individuals. For 
 
liberatarians
 
 (e.g.
Hayek 1944; Nozick 1974) free market mechanisms
are all important and for 
 
Rawlsians
 
 (Rawls 1971
2001), provided basic liberties and fair equality
of opportunity are guaranteed, inequalities are only
justified where they are to the greatest benefit of
the least advantaged.
These philosophical traditions manifest themselves
as a number of justice principles that, in turn,
influence which decision rules are regarded as the
most appropriate to apply when distributing resources
across society – should resources be distributed on
the basis of rights, needs, deserts, merits, interests,
equality or some other notion? Such questions have
a long history of philosophical debate which cannot
be covered in the brief overview here [see Miller
(1999) and Swift (2001) for a useful account]. How-
ever, it is important to be clear about the links between
this philosophical tradition and the justice principles
which appear, on paper, to offer the greatest
explanatory gain in the FRM context.
Table 3 illustrates the three 
 
fairness 
 
principles
evaluated in this paper. The first – procedural
equality – finds its roots in 
 
egalitarianism
 
 and is a
useful justice principle for FRM because of its close
association with issues of participation and stake-
holder engagement. The second – the maximin rule
– is a 
 
Rawlsian 
 
justice principle and is useful for
FRM because it specifically addresses issues of vulner-
ability; a critical concept in the FRM discourse
(Wisner 
 
et al.
 
 2004; Cutter 2006). Finally, the 
 
utili-
tarian 
 
concept of maximum utility is included
because it provides the mechanism for evaluating
the 
 
fairness
 
 of resource distribution when applied
to the dominant model of FRM project appraisal – the
benefit : cost approach.
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 4]]
 
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
 
377
 
Geographical Journal
 
 Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
 
Ultimately, therefore, the approach is 
 
pluralistic
 
drawing on the premise that FRM needs to be
beneficial to the nation as a whole (i.e. maximises
total utility), needs to ensure that all those at risk of
flooding have an equal opportunity of having their
flood risk managed by the state (i.e. procedural
equality), and that the distribution of resources
should target those most vulnerable to flooding (i.e.
Rawls’ maximum rule). In this sense, it is norma-
tive, because no government could maximise the
allocation of resources for FRM, using all three
principles, without a detrimental effect on other
societal needs; a greater share of public revenue
for FRM means a lesser share for education, health,
etc. That said, if a 
 
pluralist
 
 approach is to be
adopted, then a 
 
fair
 
 system of resource allocation
for FRM would draw on those elements of each
principle which, in the FRM context, appear to
offer the maximum potential for 
 
fair
 
 outcomes and
processes at all spatial scales – both for the
taxpayer and those at risk. Of the three justice
principles in Table 3, only the principle of equality
of opportunity directly relates to procedural justice.
The other two are based on the outcomes of
decisions (distributive justice) as determined by the
rules applied.
 
The changing flood risk policy framework
 
The policy framework within which FRM decisions
are made has undergone a significant transforma-
tion since the turn of the century (Table 1). More
recent changes have been influenced by both
incremental changes in policy, and the catalytic
influences of the 1998 and 2000 floods, such that
flood policy is no longer concerned with flood
defence 
 
per se
 
 but is inclined towards a more
holistic, strategic, multi-method and integrated
approach to land and water management (Johnson
 
et al.
 
 2004 2005; Tunstall 
 
et al.
 
 2004) (Table 2).
This has been underpinned by the embodiment
of the principles of sustainable development
in government policy more generally [e.g. HM
Government 2005; Office of the Deputy Prime
Minister (ODPM) 2003a], the influence of formal
legislative requirements such as the Water
Framework Directive (European Union 2000), the
Aarhus Convention on stakeholder engagement
and the EU Habitats and Bird’s Directive [ European
Communities (EEC) 1992], and a wealth of
research which predicts a future characterised by
significantly increased flood and coastal erosion
risks (e.g. Hall 
 
et al.
 
 2003a; Evans 
 
et al.
 
 2004).
Incrementally, at least, this has led to a new
language of discourse which, as evident elsewhere
in Europe (van Haegen 2005), argues that society
must ‘live with floods’ (Institute of Civil Engineers
2001), ‘prepare for floods’ (ODPM 2002), ‘make
space for water’ (Defra 2004) and ‘live with risk’
[United Nations/Inter-agency secretariat of the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN/
ISDR) 2004].
Table 3 Collective-choice fairness principles for FRM
Justice principle 
(type) Rule/criteria
Meaning for flood risk 
management
Potential implications 
for flood risk management
Equality 
(procedural)
All citizens to be 
treated equally
Every citizen should have 
the equal opportunity to 
have their flood risk 
managed
A greater focus on vulnerability reduction and 
state-sponsored self-help adaptations for those 
citizens for whom economic analysis will never 
justify large-scale capital expenditure in managing 
their flood risk
Maximin rule 
(distributive)
Options chosen to be 
those that favour the 
worst-off best
Resources should be 
targeted to the most 
vulnerable
Need to identify, and target assistance at, the 
most vulnerable members of society. This will 
require a range of adaptation options which are 
not necessarily focused on protecting areas of 
highest asset value
Maximise utility 
(distributive)
Options chosen to be 
those that secure the 
greatest risk reduction 
per unit of resource 
input
Assistance provided to 
those members of society 
to which the benefits offer 
the greatest gain to society
This is the current appraisal process, illustrated 
by the prioritisation score. The option selection 
should be broader than those associated with 
traditional high-cost flood protection works. The 
greatest risk reduction, for the neediest, may be 
provided, for example, by state-assisted self-help 
homeowner adaptation options
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 5]]
 
378
 
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
 
Geographical Journal
 
 Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
 
The government’s embracing of this new flood
doctrine is evident in the latest government strategy
MSW. From its initial consultation in 2004 ( Defra
2004), through to the resulting first policy
response (Defra 2005a) and delivery plan (Defra
2005b), this process has been indicative of the
changing policy framework which seeks a different
model of FRM than that which has preceded it. The
policy vision aims for decision processes and
outcomes to move away from managing risks on a
project-by-project basis towards a catchment
approach in the management of all fluvial, pluvial,
sewer and groundwater flooding. It seeks more
transparent and accountable decision processes
which allow for longer term risk drivers such as
climate change, urbanisation, increasing wealth
and social factors.
To achieve this, a more balanced approach to
decision-making is required using an integrated
portfolio of approaches at local, regional and
national scales which better reflect the social
and environmental dimensions of sustainable
development and the importance of stakeholder
involvement. The ultimate objective is to reduce
the threat to people and their properties and to
deliver ‘the greatest environmental, social and
economic benefit, consistent with the Govern-
ment’s sustainable development principles’ (Defra
2005a, 11).
When compared with our three social justice
criteria (Table 3), the policy aspirations found in
MSW are suggestive of a desire to move further
towards greater equality of opportunity in the
implementation of risk management options,
particularly for those who do not currently justify
protection by capital-intensive engineering schemes.
The more general focus on social justice and
sustainability as a policy goal, in conjunction with
the citing of the expansion of non-structural
measures such as flood warnings, awareness raising
and the promotion of resistance and resilience
measures as possible risk management tools, is
illustrative of this (Defra 2005a, 20). However, as
MSW itself recognises, this will ask searching
questions of current funding arrangements and risk
management tools which, at one extreme, would
require a change in appraisal guidance whilst, at
the other, may necessitate a change in legislation.
From a vulnerability perspective, there is no
evidence of specific policy intentions for targeting
resources or risk management options for the most
vulnerable groups in flood risk areas.
What has been accepted is the validity in principle
of this ‘new’ discourse by the operating authorities,
although questions remain as to the acceptance of
this approach in society more generally – not least
because of the greater responsibility and accounta-
bility it places on the individual. It is important to
note, however, that whilst the language is chang-
ing, the debates about what should be done remain
dominated by the ‘usual suspects’ (e.g. climate
change, development control, institutional ‘fit’, the
role of state vs. the individual, cross-policy integra-
tion, and the importance of non-structural measures)
(Penning-Rowsell 
 
et al.
 
 2006). In other words, the
new FRM ideology has yet to result in any radical
‘out of the box’ thinking even though, as the MSW
policy has indicated, the building blocks for such
innovation are now in place.
This is not because of any lack of desire on the
part of the government. It is because policy has
only recently moved into the second phase of the
FRM change process – one which argues not that
society 
 
must
 
 ‘live with floods’ or ‘make space for
water’ but debates 
 
how
 
 can society ‘live with
floods’ and ‘make space for water’. It is this shift
from the policy ideals set out in MSW (Defra 2004
2005a) to a more reality-driven implementation
and delivery phase of the MSW policy doctrine
(Defra 2005b) which is now of concern.
Implementing this new flood doctrine brings to
the fore questions about how decisions 
 
should
 
be made and how resources 
 
should
 
 be distributed
if the ideology of MSW is to be embraced into
day-to-day decisions. In so doing, this highlights
questions of 
 
fairness 
 
because it requires the decision-
making processes and resultant outcomes to be
much more transparent and accountable not just
for those paying for FRM (the taxpayers) but also
for those being asked to ‘make space for water’
(i.e. those at risk of flooding or owning floodplain
land). The question now is how far can the norma-
tive ideals set out in MSW, and/or the normative
ideals set out in Table 3, be implemented in reality
given the current FRM system of decision-making
in England.
 
Structural works for flood defence
 
Water resources management of all kinds has a
tendency to be capital intensive (Green 2003). This
means that the delivery of policy outcomes is
dominated by the approaches and methods used
to appraise the plans and projects that comprise
the ongoing programme of capital expenditure.
In England, this appraisal process ‘drives’ the
decisions regarding the c. £500 m spent annually
on FRM (Defra 2006a; Figure 1). The process is multi-
layered and each stage is complemented by complex
arrangements for stakeholder engagement and is
framed within a system of formal decision rules.
The different levels of this process, and the
 
fairness
 
 principles that they embody, are discussed
below.
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 6]]
 
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
 
379
 
Geographical Journal
 
 Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
 
The national level decision process
 
Since 2004 the EA has received a ‘block grant’
annually from Defra (Figure 1), determined as part
of Defra’s annual expenditure allocated by the
Treasury as part of Whitehall’s public expenditure
programme. In exchange, the EA agrees to meet
certain high level targets and its 
 
Spending review
2004
 
 target of managing flood and coastal erosion
risk ‘so as to contribute to sustainable development,
including minimising loss of life and improving the
standard of protection for at least 100,000 households’
(Defra 2006a). The block grant system replaced a
regionally based levy on local authorities combined
with Defra grant-in-aid tied to specific projects
(MAFF 1993).
The Defra priority score system is the mechanism
for controlling this expenditure, despite Defra
agreeing that the EA ‘decides how to spend the
money to best achieve the outcomes agreed by Defra’
(Defra 2006b). The scoring system is designed to
prevent projects entering the funding process
unless they pass a threshold based on their likely
economic, social and environmental performance.
Defra (2006b) sees this as a fair and objective
system’ and that prioritisation is necessary since ‘it
is not possible to justify defending all locations to
the same standard or at all in some cases’ (Defra
2006a, 2).
Careful analysis of the scoring system (Table 4)
shows that whilst it does not appear to be
dominated by the benefit : cost economic utility
criterion (because the social and the environment
scores could, in theory, outweigh the benefit : cost
component), in practice the results are determined
by whether a project achieves a benefit : cost score
of at least 5.0 : 1. As public expenditure projects,
therefore, FRM spend gives very high returns on
the investment incurred, probably the best across
all Whitehall Departments (Richardson 2006,
personal communication; ABI 2006a).
When compared with our three social justice
criteria, targeting the most vulnerable and delivering
procedural equality is not the aim here. Indeed,
Defra clearly states that ‘there is no statutory right
to levels of protection. Individuals and communities
will have variable standards of defence according
to geography, the operating authorities’ different
approach and priorities, and the varying ratio of
benefits and costs from providing particular defences’
(Defra 2006a, 2). Utility considerations therefore
dominate these decisions, albeit with some flexibility
in decision-making so that other social and
environmental considerations are not completely
ignored.
Table 4 The elements of Defra’s priority scoring system 
Element Contributions to the score total
Economics benefit : cost 
ratio <1
benefit : cost 
ratio 1.0–10.5
benefit : cost 
ratio >10.5
Economics score 
(max = 20)
0 1–20 on linear 
scale
20
People Base score Very high-risk area High-risk area Vulnerability add-on
People score 
(max = 12)
75 × number properties/cost 
(£k) (max score = 8)
+2 +1 –2 to +2
Environment SSSI protected National BAP gain Grade I or II* heritage 
site protected
Grade II or other 
heritage site protecte
d
Environment score 
(max = 12)
25 × area (ha) 
× 1.5/cost (k)
25 × area (ha) 
× 2.0/cost (k)
+2 +1
Source: Defra (2006a)
Figure 1 Total central and local government expenditure on 
flood and coastal erosion risk management
Source: Defra (2006a)
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 7]]
 
380
 
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
 
Geographical Journal
 
 Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
 
The regional level planning process
 
Through its 
 
Corporate strategy
 
 and its 
 
Strategy for
flood risk management 2003/4 to 2007/8
 
 the EA’s
investment priorities are formulated within a risk-
based approach to FRM whereby resources and
efforts are targeted at the locations or communities
where the greatest benefits can be achieved (Hall
 
et al.
 
 2003b). In this context, each EA catchment-
based region (e.g. Anglia; Thames) is charged with
developing a capital expenditure programme based
on a catchment flood management plan (CFMP)
(EA 2006a). These CFMPs ‘aim to encourage an
integrated, sustainable and strategic approach to
the management of flood risk in river catchments’
(EA 2006a, 3) by identifying locations where flood
mitigation interventions are most likely to be
viable. The methodology – which is evolving – is
based on a modelling and decision support frame-
work (MDSF) that uses a hierarchy of methods
developed by HR Wallingford (Hall et al.  2003b);
the intermediate level method (ILM) has been
developed for applying to catchment/coastal cells
at a regional scale.
The key point here is that MDSF is almost
entirely concerned with the simplest analysis of the
economic impacts of FRM strategies. Admittedly, a
social flood vulnerability index (Tapsell et al. 2002)
is embedded within the MDSF, but the practition-
ers undertaking the CFMPs have no clear direction
or understanding as to how these results should be
used (Chatterton 2006, personal communication).
The CFMPs that are emerging represent a dominantly
utilitarian approach, using narrowly defined economic
criteria, to select areas for subsequent attention and
investment. This is somewhat contrary to the trends
in MSW at the national level.
The project (local) level decision process
In terms of actual FRM interventions, as opposed to
plans, it is the appraisal of local projects/schemes
that really counts. Institutionally, it is the Regional
Flood Defence Committees and regional staff of
the EA who select flood defence schemes to put
forward to a national scrutiny system. Two sets of
advice from Defra determine the fate of such schemes
in this ‘sieving’ process: the so-called PAG series of
Project Advisory Guidance (e.g. MAFF 1999), and
the Defra Priority Scoring system (see above).
The PAG series sets out how projects should be
appraised and, in particular, the way that the
benefit : cost analysis of FRM schemes should be
undertaken. Whilst PAG3 (MAFF 1999) stresses that
decisions should not be made solely on narrow
economic criteria, in practice it is the analysis of
flood damages avoided that dominates the PAG3
process (Johnson et al. 2007). Here, an incre mental
approach is taken to select the scheme option
that maximises the ratio of benefits to costs and, in
turn, examines the incremental change in benefits
and costs with progressively higher design standards.
This stepwise approach represents a major change
from the previous system, whereby a scheme
simply had to pass the benefit : cost test itself to be
considered viable (i.e. with a benefit : cost ratio
>1.0), and it represents a significant tightening of
the economic ‘screw’.
In practice, therefore, for an engineering scheme
to be implemented within the EA’s annual capital
programme for FRM it has to have a benefit : cost
ratio of approximately 5 : 1, which is enormous by
historical standards (Penning-Rowsell et al.  2005). It
also has to have a Defra priority score of greater than
20 (implying a strong benefit : cost element to that
score) (Table 5), and the design itself must achieve a
strongly positive benefit : cost result over and above a
scheme at the same location with a lesser design
standard. Additionally, of course, the scheme must be
supported by local stakeholders and have limited
adverse environmental consequences.
Since 2003, however, Defra has required all
project appraisals to address issues of socio-economic
equity, by considering distributional impacts  where
it is necessary and practical to do so (HM Treasury
2003). This is a subjective process, intended to
counter the ‘risk of a catchment-wide strategy
having a socially unfair outcome’ (Defra 2003, 3).
Appraisals are required to apply weighted factors
(which provide for positive and negative adjust-
ments in favour of the low and high social classes,
respectively) to standard depth–damage curves
(Penning-Rowsell et al. 2005) so that the less well-off
are now no longer disadvantaged in the benefit : cost
test (HM Treasury 2003). In reality, however, the
extent to which this offers equality of outcome
depends on the scale of analysis being investigated.
Outcomes may appear ‘more equal’ at the local
level but this equality is diminished over space and
time because any intervention which alters ‘with
scheme’ risk levels influences negatively the relative
risk of those ‘without’.
Therefore, the decision-making process currently
‘driving’ the annual FRM spend in England has
limited consideration for issues of equality. In
terms of procedural equality, only those schemes
with a high benefit : cost score have any chance of
being considered for funding. Indeed, this system is
designed to exclude, not include, projects from the
funding processes. Where attempts have been
made to include equality, these are in terms of
outcome equality through the application of distri-
butional impacts . However, this process is both
locally subjective and ultimately ineffectual at a
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 8]]
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England 381
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
national level – thus making outcome equality an
unobtainable and unrealistic goal. Similarly, the
current decision-making system does not specifi-
cally target those most vulnerable to flooding. The
dominant criteria used in the decision process remain
unambiguously designed to maximise utility. Only
if designated environmental sites are to be protected
do other criteria hold sway.
The challenges in practice: the case of the 
Lower Thames
Only a real example shows the difficulty of finding
fair FRM strategies. It demonstrates – additionally –
that the viability of flood mitigation schemes is
highly place specific.
The reach of the River Thames between Windsor
and the tidal limit at Teddington lock has a large
floodplain occupied by 13 100 properties (within
the 1 : 200-year flood outline). The last major flood
occurred in 1947 (Barker 1948), since when the
floodplain has been increasingly urbanised despite
land use planning restrictions (Howe and White
2001). Lengthy investigations (Sir William Halcrow
& Partners Ltd 1990 1992; Halcrow Group Ltd &
Babtie Brown and Root 2004) have sought schemes
to alleviate the flood risk here in recognition of the
seriousness of a repeat of this event or the more
extreme flood that occurred in 1894. Minor flooding
in 2003, affecting some 200 properties, gave a
foretaste of what will inevitably come.
This is probably the largest concentration of
unprotected flood-prone properties in England. Yet,
immediately upstream, the towns of Maidenhead,
Eton and Windsor are protected by a large bypass
channel, constructed in the 1990s with a target
design standard of 1 : 65 years, although the stand-
ard achieved appears to be somewhat lower
(National Audit Office forthcoming). Immediately
downstream, the centre of London is protected
from flooding from the North Sea by the Thames
Barrier (Horner 1972) to a standard of more than
1 : 1000 years. In between these two, the Windsor–
Teddington reach is only protected from flooding
to the extent that the navigational structures on
the Thames regulate its flow, and out-of-bank
flooding occurs at a return period of approximately
1 : 10 years rather than more frequently. Clearly
the risk of flooding in the three areas is significantly
different and this difference, at this spatial scale, is
directly a result of the actions of the agencies of
the state.
To correct this, at least to some extent, plans
have been developed for flood mitigation actions
in the Lower Thames reach, involving the appraisal
of further bypass channels and a selection of
complementary non-structural measures. The aim
of the Lower Thames appraisal (Halcrow Group Ltd
& Babtie Brown and Root 2004) was to identify
flood mitigation options that would protect as
many people and properties as possible, to as
high a standard as possible, commensurate with
Table 5 The results of the appraisal of major engineering options for flood mitigation in the Lower Thames
Option 1 Option 2 Option 3 Option 4
Scheme summary Diversion channels 
1, 2 and 3 plus dredging 
the Staines reach
Diversion 
channels 1, 2 
and 3 only
Diversion channels 
2 and 3 plus dredging 
of Bell Weir reach
Diversion 
channels 
2 and 3
Total cost (£m) 225 200 143 108
Cost: benefit ratio 1 : 3.02 1 : 3.10 1 : 3.51 1 : 4.27
Number of properties 
taken out of high 
risk (1 : 20 years)
2891 2764 2441 2295
Number of properties 
taken out of insurance 
embargo area (1 : 75 years)
5302 4725 3435 3249
Cost per property protected 
(£) (taken out of insurance 
embargo area)
42 400 42 300 41 600 33 200
Defra priority score 11 12 13 15
Properties left unprotected 
(%) (1 : 75 years)
59 64 74 75
Source: Halcrow Group Ltd et al. (forthcoming)
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 9]]
382 ‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
adherence to Defra’s appraisal guidance (MAFF
1999).
A wide-ranging search for economically viable,
environmentally sensitive and ‘socially acceptable’
measures has shown that upstream flood storage
would have negligible effects on flood levels here
at the lowest point of the fluvial catchment and
would only mitigate the most minor of floods
(Halcrow Group Ltd & Babtie Brown and Root
2004). In terms of removing extreme flood water
levels from the floodplain, the most technically
effective measures would be systems of bypass
channels designed to increase in-bank conveyance
(Figure 2). These would be effective for floods of
all return periods and have only a very minor effect
in raising flood levels downstream. The proposals
developed in 2006 mirrored those developed
more than a decade earlier and rejected then on
benefit : cost grounds (Sir William Halcrow &
Partners Ltd 1992).
However, there are both technical and spatial
planning problems. Bypass channels have to bypass
locks, to create gradient to generate their flood
discharge. They also need to pass through open
areas, to avoid massive property purchase and
demolition. The legacy therefore of the navigation
structures on the Thames, and the pattern of flood-
plain development that now exists, ‘drives’ the
process of option selection: the only routes that
appear acceptable are those shown in Figure 2,
leaving the Staines reach to convey all flood flows
in between the two bypass sub-systems.
 
Figure 2 Diversion channels and river works evaluated in 2006 for the Lower Thames
Source: Halcrow Group Ltd et al. (forthcoming)
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 10]]
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England 383
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
The appraisal results for these engineering
options are shown in Table 5. The most cost-effective
of the proposals is the one that protects fewest
people, leaving 75% of the 13 100 1 : 200 year
floodplain properties unprotected and providing
virtually no protection to the areas upstream of
Staines (where, ironically, the 2003 flood was most
serious). The scheme that protects most people
involves routing the northernmost channel through
a Special Protection Area (SPA), through contaminated
landfill sites (creating a cost penalty), and requires
dredging the Staines reach that contains a small
population of the Depressed Water Mussel Pseudan-
odonta complanata  (a ‘Red Book’ species; Aldridge
et al.  2006) which would be destroyed. It would
also cost an additional £117 million (Table 5).
In no scheme can all the people and property be
protected, and no viable scheme gives the same
design standards as at Maidenhead or in central
London (even option 1 gives only a 1 : 40 year
protection standard). Moreover, none of the schemes
listed in Table 5 and shown in Figure 2 meet the
current Defra priority score target of c. 20, all
falling short by a wide margin. This indicates that
there are other flood mitigation schemes elsewhere
in the country that yield a higher rate of benefit
gain per unit of cost, and therefore win higher
priority for funding. Moreover, in parts of the Lower
Thames area the population does not want to be
protected from flooding if it means substantial
amenity loss. Amongst these are the communities
located on islands in the Thames where holiday
homes and recreational ‘cabins’ have been constructed
over the last 100 or so years. Many were built
before spatial planning controls were first introduced
in the UK in 1947 and now flood regularly (to
which their occupants are well adjusted).
If major engineering options are not viable here
on economic grounds (i.e. given their benefit : cost
and priority score results) then perhaps some form
of minor engineering works and non-structural
measures might alleviate some, if not all, of the
flood risk. Research has shown that ‘community’
and temporary flood bunds and walls to protect
those most at risk (i.e. those in the 10–25 year
flood outline) are viable and acceptable to the
population affected in certain areas (McCarthy et al.
2006). However, any such measures would need to
be highly localised to be technically effective,
involving ‘hand stitching’ the small-scale works
into the urban fabric so as to create least disruption
to property and traffic. The result would also be to
create dry ‘islands’ within the flooded areas, and
raise flood levels marginally elsewhere.
Targeted warning systems, efforts to enhance
insurance penetration, and an even tighter spatial
planning regime in these areas would reduce flood
risk, but only in the target areas. The consequence
is that attempts to reduce some of the flood risk by
these means actually create relative inequality with
floodplain areas that do not receive this special
attention. Whilst this is an inherent problem with
locally implemented FRM options, these local
protection and non-structural measures clearly offer
an opportunity to reduce flood risk where major
engineering measures cannot be implemented.
This case study illustrates that technically and
economically effective FRM can be inherently
unfair, and that those seeking outcome equality are
perhaps misguided. Other locations are likely to
show the same results (Defra 2004 2005a 2005b),
whether they are Bewdley’s situation of one side of
the river Severn justifying flood defence works and
the other not, or cases like Boscastle (EA 2004)
where high-impact low-frequency events generate
few economic benefits to set against significant
costs. Remote rural settlements will also generate
very few FRM investment opportunities, in contrast
to dense urban areas, and there will be other situations
where flood protection could only be provided at
the expense of significant environmental damage or
where it is not technically possible to engineer the
required works. Whilst recognising that the natural
distribution of flooding is also not fair, the current
appraisal regime appears to lead inevitably to greater
rather than less outcome inequality.
Non-structural strategies
Major engineering works cannot, at current budget
levels, sustainably protect all of the 1.8 million
properties at risk of flooding. Even those protected
continue to be exposed to a residual flood risk
both because of variable standards of defence
(dependent on local cost–benefit calculations) and
because all flood defences retain the residual risk
of overtopping their design standards.
Therefore, as in the Lower Thames area, there
remain a significant number of properties at risk
of flooding for whom non-structural measures are
either the only risk management tools available or
where these measures remain important in a portfolio
of FRM response options. Of these options, some
are funded and managed nationally, some locally
and some are determined by the resources and
management skills of the individual. This ‘patchwork’
approach means that when assessed against the
fairness criteria in Table 3, a varied picture emerges.
Insurance
Insurance is an individual risk-bearing strategy
which, provided the uptake is high, removes
pressure from the government who would otherwise
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 11]]
384 ‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
have to provide additional assistance following
flooding in the way of damage compensation
(Priest et al.  2005; Huber 2004). This close associ-
ation between the provision of flood defence by
the government and the widespread provision of
commercially available insurance is a critical factor
in the English FRM system (Green and Penning-
Rowsell 2004).
Because of this, insurance remains high on the
FRM agenda, particularly regarding debates about
the appropriate ‘levels’ of flood defence spend and
the commitment of insurers to continue affordable
insurance for customers in high-risk areas. As it
currently stands, householders can seek flood risk
insurance where their annual probability of flooding
is 1.3% or less (75-year return period) (ABI 2005).
Where the annual probability is greater than 1.3%
there is no guarantee that insurance will be available
(CIWEM 2006). The problem is that as a voluntary
risk management option, uptake may be low,
particularly for the less well-off members of society
or those living in high-risk areas where premiums
are prohibitively high (Priest et al. 2005); as such it
becomes highly problematic as a reliable and
equitable FRM option.
Flood insurance clearly fits the utilitarian model
because, ultimately, the insurance industry exists to
provide the greatest returns to its shareholders by
managing its risk portfolio across space and time
such that its risk underwriting remains profitable
(Green and Penning-Rowsell 2004). It does not,
however, fit the equality or vulnerability criteria of
decision fairness. Indeed, in terms of targeting the
most vulnerable, except for the more recent attempts
to reduce contents insurance premiums for those in
social housing under ‘pay-with-rent’ schemes, it is
the ‘socially vulnerable’ that are most likely to be
uninsured (Whyley et al.  1998).
Therefore, although in theory all those at risk of
flooding have an equal opportunity of taking out
flood risk insurance, in practice this is dependent
on affordability. In countries without such a close
association between the public provision of flood
defence and the private provision of insurance,
uninsurance would neither be unusual nor
unacceptable (Priest et al. 2005). However, in England,
such uninsurance is indicative of social inequality.
Indeed, any potential move towards the withdrawing
of flood risk insurance and/or the increasing of
premiums beyond affordability levels creates signi-
ficant inequality issues in the English context (Priest
et al.  2005).
Flood warnings and awareness raising
The move from flood defence to FRM has increased
the prominence of flood warnings and public
awareness as important tools for managing flood
risk. The primary purpose of flood warnings is to
save lives by increasing the time available for
people and emergency services to prepare for flooding;
its secondary purpose is its damage reducing effect
(Defra 2004). The primary purpose of public
awareness campaigns is to increase the ‘risk
knowledge’ of those living in flood risk areas so
that they behave appropriately.
Since its inception in 1996, it has been the
responsibility of the EA to deliver flood warnings
and raise the awareness of those at risk of flooding
– although this does not include sewer, groundwa-
ter or pluvial flooding. After the negative analysis
of the EA’s performance in this regard following the
1998 floods (Bye and Horner 1998), the EA has
made significant improvements. Most notably, it
created a National Flood Warning Centre (which
although significant at the time has since ceased
operating), introduced annual public awareness
campaigns, and is now on its third Flood Warning
Investment Strategy (EA 2003b) – all of which aim
for national coordination and consistency (Andrysze-
wski et al. 2005).
The EA has also introduced a 24-hour Floodline
telephone advice and information line, new and
more graphic flood warning codes, new incident
management procedures, a National Flood Forecasting
System, and the replacement of the Automatic Voice
Messaging service with a new opt-in system of
warning – Floodline Warnings Direct. This provides
those at risk of flooding with warnings direct to
their telephone, mobile, fax or pager and through
such technologies the EA continues to strive for a
nationally consistent approach to flood forecasting
and warning dissemination.
This ‘package’ of flood warning dissemination
tools is intended to ensure that the EA’s actions are
in accordance with its customer charter which
states that: ‘Prior warning will be provided (two
hours in general) to people living in designated
flood risk areas where a flood forecasting facility
exists and where lead times enable us to do so’ (EA
2002). In addition, the EA has set out more specific
intentions in its latest corporate plan (2006–9),
most notable of which is their continued commit-
ment to the use of campaigns and flood maps for
the provision of flood risk information to the
public, their restated aim of achieving an 80%
target in the provision of flood warnings to those at
risk, and a commitment to increase the uptake of
such warnings, particularly for the most vulnerable
(EA 2006b).
However, this does not imply that 80% of those
at risk of flooding will receive similar ‘levels’ of
flood warnings. Rather, it means that 80% of those
at risk of flooding should receive a nationally
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 12]]
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England 385
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
consistent minimum level of service. This is in
recognition of, firstly, ongoing funding constraints
and, secondly, that the level of service provided
should be proportionate to the level of risk – based
on a maximum, intermediate and a minimum
requirement for a given flood risk area (Andrysze-
wski et al.  2005).
The search for a nationally consistent approach
to flood warnings and public awareness raising fits
well with the principle of procedural equality. All
those at risk of flooding have an equal opportunity
to receive a minimum standard of warning and
information via awareness campaigns, regardless of
their level of risk exposure. And, in recognition of
the inherent inequality of flood risk exposure, for
those in high-risk areas this service is expanded
to include more direct mailing of awareness
campaigns and flood risk information together with
the development of more detailed flood warnings
and emergency plans. However, this only applies
to fluvial and coastal flood risk and in this respect
the provision of flood warnings is not yet in
keeping with the MSW doctrine which aims for a
joined-up approach to pluvial, fluvial, coastal,
groundwater and sewer flooding (Defra 2004).
The EA’s commitment in their latest Corporate
Plan to target flood warnings to the most vulnera-
ble is illustrative of their commitment to fairness
principles based on a different model of social
justice. This is in keeping with recent EA-funded
research on flood warnings and vulnerable groups
which recognises the multi-faceted, complex and
dynamic nature of vulnerability and the resultant
difficulties that emerge when attempting to target
flood warnings to vulnerable groups (Thrush et al.
2005a 2005b). It is also in keeping with EA-
sponsored research investigating the social per-
formance of flood warning delivery technologies
(Tapsell et al.  2004). The outcome, Floodline
Warnings Direct (FWD), provides a choice of both
visual and audible warnings media (suitable for the
hard of hearing and blind); warnings in different
languages; and various channels for accessing flood
warnings which may be suited to the young and
elderly, disabled, working and non-working people.
By seeking a nationally consistent minimum
standard for flood warning dissemination, this non-
structural strategy does not accord with the rules
of maximum utility which would maximise risk
reduction per unit of input and in turn lead to flood
warning investment prioritising high-risk areas. This
is not to say that the EA’s latest flood warning
investment strategy (with an anticipated investment
of £250 million over 10 years in England and
Wales; EA 2003b) does not recognise the impor-
tance of seeking economic efficiency for taxpayer’s
money (with estimates of flood damages avoided of
£1261 million over 10 years and a benefit : cost
ratio of 4.82 : 1; EA 2003b). Rather, it recognises
that a strictly utilitarian approach would not facilitate
meeting the EA’s warning objective of developing a
national service.
Land-use control and management
The principal FRM purpose of land use control and
management is to discourage inappropriate devel-
opment in areas of flood risk (Defra 2006b) and to
prevent upstream developments having adverse
downstream consequences (Howe and White 2001;
Parker 1995).
Successive governments have been seeking ways
of controlling urban development of floodplains
since the 1940s (see DoE et al.  1982 1992). After
the 1998 and 2000 flooding, floodplain develop-
ment control was elevated in importance by the
government introducing Policy and Planning
Guidance (PPG) 25 and, later, the new Planning
Policy Statement (PPS) 25 (Communities and Local
Government 2006).
PPS 25 suggests a more strategic and centrally
prescribed approach and implies more rigorous
and systematic nationally consistent processes and
procedures, including strategic and regional flood
risk assessments as part of the development planning
and decision-making process. The PPS also includes
an exceptions test for low-lying areas where nearly
all developable land is liable to flooding and where
some continuing development is necessary for wider
sustainability reasons and to avoid social and
economic blight. There is also an emphasis upon
reducing – rather than just avoiding – adding to
flood risk and, lastly, PPS 25 emphasises the need
to plan for all forms of flooding (e.g. groundwater,
reservoir and canal flooding) rather than just flooding
from rivers and the sea.
PPS 25 supports the principle of procedural
equality. All of those at risk of increased flooding
through development (for example through upstream
developments impacting downstream, or in some
other way), or proposing to develop in floodplains,
will have an equal opportunity to have their situations
assessed using broadly similar approaches and tools
within a nationally consistent decision-making
framework. PPS 25 also recognises the special case
represented by low-lying local authorities in which
decisions not to allow some floodplain development
would have wider adverse social and economic
impacts, and therefore safeguards against wider
social and economic inequalities between local
areas which might otherwise arise.
In targeting the most vulnerable, PPS 25 distin-
guishes, for example, between properties such as
dwelling homes constructed or adapted for the
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 13]]
386 ‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
elderly or other people with impaired mobility,
residential institutions such as care homes, children’s
homes, and gypsy and travellers sites (classed as
more and highly vulnerable) from buildings used as
shops, offices and land and buildings used for
agriculture or forestry (classed as less vulnerable).
Different approaches and planning decisions are
expected here according to assessed vulnerability
and, as such, there is a commitment to fairness
based upon vulnerability principles.
Overall, by seeking to constrain and reduce, but
not entirely avoid, floodplain development the
nationally consistent approach incorporated in PPS
25 may go some way to adopting a maximum
utility model. In such a model, floodplain develop-
ment which leads to a surplus of benefits over
costs is allowed, whereas development which
yields no surplus or is in deficit is not permitted.
However, although there are elements of such a
perspective in, for example, recent decisions to
develop the Thames Gateway floodplains and
floodplain margins for housing, wider social and
economic regeneration factors are taken into
account. And, in future, PPS 25 suggests decisions
will not be made according to a narrow economic
utility perspective but will be cognisant of risk to
life and the differential vulnerability of buildings and
people, as well as wider sustainability arguments.
Home owner adaptation
Making individual houses and businesses more
resistant to flooding (i.e. to reduce the amount of
water entering a property) and more resilient (i.e.
to reduce the overall damage when flood waters do
enter a property) is an important risk management
option – particularly for rural/isolated communities
(ODPM 2003b). Of the options available to
homeowners some are relatively inexpensive or
indeed cost free (e.g. unplugging electrical items,
sandbagging, flood boarding, installing airbrick
covers) whilst others are more costly (e.g. flood
‘skirts’ and flood gates). In recognition of the lack
of quality assurance about these products, and the
need for national standards, the EA and others
commissioned the introduction of a Kitemark
system in 2003, managed by the British Standards
Institution (BSI) in accordance with approvals
received from the HR Wallingford test facility. At
present, some 100 products have been awarded this
quality standard (EA 2006c).
In addition to the provision of government
guidance for homeowners (ODPM 2003b), the EA
and the ABI have increasingly stressed the importance
of these tools for managing flood risk at the local
level (ABI 2006b 2006c). Whilst there are clearly
benefits to be gained from the implementation of
these adaptation options, not least for the insurance
industry, the onus for funding these options falls
firmly on the individual homeowner – albeit with
some assurance from the Council of British Mortgage
lenders that mortgage extensions will be considered
to accommodate this extra cost, provided there is
equity in the property to do so (ABI 2006b). There
is no government funding to support this option.
Thus, whilst theoretically all households at risk
of flooding have the equal opportunity of adapting
their homes using kitemarked products, in reality
this option is only available to either those owning
their own homes and/or those who can afford them.
Ultimately, therefore, as a fair risk management
option, homeowner adaptation suffers from similar
shortcomings to that of insurance in that it neither
fits the vulnerability nor the equality criterion of
decision fairness. Indeed, it is the ‘socially vulner-
able’ that are least likely to be able to afford the
products on offer.
Emergency management
There is now a major effort under way to improve
flood emergency response in England, following
the floods in Carlisle and other parts of Cumbria in
July 2005 (EA 2004; Government Office for the
North West 2005). The Carlisle floods led to the
loss of two lives, 3500 homes were flooded, many
evacuations were necessary, 60 000 homes lost
electricity, and the ‘999’ emergency telephone
service failed. The lessons learned from such events
were drawn together through a major national
flood emergency response exercise called ‘Exercise
Triton’ (EA 2005a). The EA is now seeking to
improve its flood incident management process
(EA/Defra 2005), within the framework of the new
Civil Contingencies Act, which provides the basis
for a nationally consistent and enhanced approach
to addressing all emergencies (EA 2005b).
There is little sign of a utility model underpinning
flood emergency management, whereby most effort
might be targeted at damage reduction. The costs
and benefits of emergency management of floods
are rather poorly understood (Penning-Rowsell and
Wilson 2006) but balancing them is not the main
policy thrust. The principal drive is towards a
nationally consistent approach, delivering procedural
equality. In theory, the chances of those at risk of
flooding having an equal or similar opportunity of
receiving a minimum standard of warning and assist-
ance from the emergency services should thereby
improve.
That this is so is not only because of the major
effort to improve flood emergency response taking
place within the framework of the Civil Contingen-
cies Act; it is also because the flood warning and
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 14]]
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England 387
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
emergency response needs of those living in small
as well as large catchments are being addressed
more or less equally (EA/Defra 2005), and because
the EA is seeking to extend its flood warning
system to groundwater, sewer and surface water
flooding (EA 2005b).
The emergency services also place an emphasis
upon identifying, locating and assisting as early as
possible in an emergency those who are most
vulnerable to flooding, including the elderly and
infirm (Tapsell et al.  2002). Significant attention is
now paid to building up databases of those at
risk from a vulnerability standpoint, confirming a
commitment to fairness principles based on Rawls’
maximin rule. Notwithstanding this, the fortunes of
individuals and communities caught up in floods
will still remain somewhat arbitrary, unequal, and
unpredictable, being a function of local geography.
It is therefore almost impossible to construct an
emergency management system and process which
is capable of responding effectively and similarly
to all flood emergencies, but the policy drive is
to seek this where possible (EA 2005a).
Conclusions
Flood risk is inherently unfair: rivers obviously do
not flood everywhere, risk probabilities therefore
vary widely in space and time, and human
occupancy of floodplains is similarly disparate. The
result is a system of inherent inequalities caused
by either ‘natural injustices’ or injustices imposed
by the flood risk management actions of individuals
or the state. And because these inequalities have
always – and will always – result in variable levels
of risk across both space and time, outcome
equality becomes an impossible flood risk manage-
ment goal.
Recognising this, the purpose of FRM then surely
becomes one of managing these injustices so as
to minimise the relative inequalities in flood risk
across society. This results in a number of challenges
for implementing fair FRM, not least significant
of which is how to manage the fair distribution of
national resources whilst recognising the fairness
concerns of those at risk.
The analysis in this paper has shown that the
current system of decision-making which prioritises
benefit : cost analysis of structural flood defences,
using nationally determined standards, does not
offer procedural equality. Nor does it have the
ability to target those most vulnerable to flooding,
or assist those at-risk areas that will never justify
large capital intensive schemes. The paper has also
highlighted the value in moving towards imple-
menting more nationally consistent standards for
non-structural strategies, which appear to offer
greater adherence to principles of equality and
vulnerability in their design (excepting insurance
and homeowner adaptation). Further progress in
this direction would require a change in the FRM
funding regime, to place minor local works and
non-structural strategies (excepting insurance) on a
similar footing to that currently provided for major
engineering strategies.
In addition, as the Lower Thames case study
illustrates, the current system of decision-making
can lead to local-level injustices. This is because
the risk management options available for those
who do not qualify for structural defence options
(‘the have nots’) are significantly reduced by
comparison with the ‘haves’.
To counter this procedural inequity, and in
recognition of the local specificity that character-
ises flood risk, we suggest that a secondary ‘tier’ of
decision making should be introduced with a
locally determined threshold priority score system
where flood risks do not cross the ‘national
problem’ threshold for funding. However, this would
require the active engagement of decision-makers
in procedural inequality because it would require
funding streams to be directed, by a process of
positive discrimination, towards ‘local problems’.
But this may be the lesser of two evils: by redirecting
national resources in such a way, relative inequalities
could be reduced, thus at least offering the ‘have
nots’ some form of protection (albeit with lower
standards) and lower thresholds for the distribution
of government funding.
There are two important caveats to this
suggestion. Firstly, such a change would require
increased funding which may require a reinvesti-
gation of the use of local levies and/or local
authority funding for FRM. This approach would
also have to be applied to all at-risk areas if it is to
be consistent with the principles of procedural
equity. Secondly, where minor engineering measures
are implemented in local areas, to lower design
standards, designs must be implemented so as to
be ‘fail safe’.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the use of resources from
the EPSRC’s Flood Risk Management Research
Consortium and the Flood site project towards the
research underpinning this paper.
References
ABI (Association of British Insurers ) 2005 ABI statement of
principles on the provision of flood insurance  updated
version ABI, London
ABI 2006a A future for the floodplains ABI, London
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 15]]
388 ‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
ABI 2006b Flood resilience and resistance factsheet for insurers
and loss adjusters  ABI and the Chartered Institute of Loss
Adjusters, London
ABI 2006c Repairing your home or business after a flood –
how to limit damage and disruption in the future  ABI and the
National Flood Forum, London and Worcestershire
Aldridge D, Mueller S, McIover A, Arbuckle K, Boyco C and
Burditt T 2006 Conservation of the depressed river mussel,
Pseudanodonta complanata (http://www.zoo.cam.ac.uk)
Accessed 10 December
Andryszewski A, Evans K, Haggett C, Mitchell B and Whitfield
D 2005 Flood warning – the next step-change 40th Flood
and coastal management conference Defra, London
Barker D  1948 Harvest home: the official story of the great
floods of 1947 and their sequel HMSO, London
Blaikie P, Cannon T, Davis I and Wisner B 1994 At risk: natural
hazards, people’s vulnerability and disasters  Routledge,
London and New York
Boelens R  1998 Equity and rule making in Boelens R and
Dávila G eds Searching for equity: conceptions of justice and
equity in peasant irrigation  Royal Van Gorcum, Assen, The
Netherlands 16–34
Burningham K and Thrush D  2001 Rainforests are a long way
from here: the environmental concerns of disadvantaged
groups Joseph Rowntree Foundation, York
Bye P and Horner M  1998 Easter 1998 floods: report by the
independent review team to the board of the Environment
Agency Environment Agency, Bristol
CIWEM (Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental
Management) 2006 Taking managed realignment forward as
a policy option for coastal management in England and Wales
CIWEM, London
Communities and Local Government  2006 Planning policy
statement 25: Development and flood risk  Communities and
Local Government, London
Cutter S 2006 Hazards, vulnerability and environmental justice
Earthscan, London and Sterling
Defra (Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs)
2003 Delivery plan for implementing the conclusions of the
flood and coastal defence funding review Defra, London
Defra 2004 Making space for water: developing a new govern-
ment strategy for flood and coastal erosion risk management
in England: a consultation exercise Defra, London
Defra 2005a Making space for water: taking forward a new
government strategy for flood and coastal erosion risk
management in England. First government response to the
autumn 2004 Making space for water consultation exercise
Defra, London
Defra 2005b Making space for water: taking forward a new
government strategy for flood and coastal erosion risk
management in England. Delivery plan Defra, London
Defra 2006a Flood and coastal erosion risk management Defra,
London
Defra 2006b Capital grant allocations for flood and coastal
erosion risk management Defra, London
DoE (Department of the Environment)/Ministry of Agriculture
Fisheries and Food (MAFF)/Welsh Office  1982 Develop-
ment and flood risk  Circular 17/82 DoE/MAFF/Welsh
Office, London
DoE/MAFF/Welsh Office  1992 Development and flood risk
Circular 30/92 DoE/MAFF/Welsh Office, London
Environment Agency (EA ) 2002 High level target 2: provision
of flood warnings Report to Defra EA, Bristol
EA 2003a Strategy for flood risk management (2003/4–2007/8)
Version 1.2 EA, Bristol
EA 2003b Flood warning investment strategy appraisal report
2003/4 to 2012/13 EA, Bristol
EA 2004 Living with the risk: the floods in Boscastle and North
Cornwall 16 August 2004 EA, Exeter
EA 2005a Lessons learned: the combined action plan to deliver
the lessons learned from Boscastle, the northern floods, exer-
cise Triton and the southern tidal surge event  HR Walling-
ford, Wallingford
EA 2005b Civil  Contingencies Act 2004 Incident manage-
ment roles and responsibilities of the Environment Agency
EA, Bristol
EA 2006a Catchment flood management plans – the back-
ground  EA, Bristol
EA 2006b Environment Agency corporate plan 2006–09:
translating strategy into action  EA, Bristol
EA 2006c Kitemark scheme  (http://www. environment-
agency.gov.uk/subjects/flood/826674/830330/877142/484693)
Accessed 5 December 2006
EA/Defra 2005 Risk assessment for flood event management:
phase 1  FDB(05)01, WPO Definition and boundary setting
report HR Wallingford, Wallingford
European Communities (EEC ) 1992 Council directive 1992/43/
EC Conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and
flora Official Journal of European Communities  L 206 7–
50
European Union  2000 Council directive 2000/60/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000
establishing a framework for community action in the
field of water policy Official Journal of European Communities
L 327 1–72
Evans E P, Ashley R, Hall J, Penning-Rowsell E C, Saul A,
Sayers P, Thorne C and Watkinson A  2004 Foresight:
future flooding, 2 volumes  Office of Science and Tech-
nology, London
Fielding J and Burningham K  2005 Environmental inequality
and flood hazard Local Environment 10 1–17
Fielding J, Burningham K and Thrush D  2005a Flood warning
for vulnerable groups: mapping and measuring vulnerability
EA, Bristol
Fielding J, Gray K, Burningham K and Thrush D  2005b Flood
warning for vulnerable groups: secondary analysis of flood
data EA, Bristol
Gleick P H 1998 Water in crisis: paths to sustainable water use
Ecological Applications 8 571–9
Government Office for the North West  2005 Carlisle storms
and associated flooding: multi-agency debrief report Govern-
ment Office for the North West
Green C  2003 Handbook of water economics: principles and
practice Wiley, Chichester
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 16]]
‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England 389
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
Green C and Penning-Rowsell E  2004 Flood insurance and
government: ‘parasitic’ and ‘symbiotic’ relations The Geneva
Papers on Risk and Insurance 29 518–39
Halcrow Group Ltd  et al. forthcoming Lower Thames project
– phase 3: final report  Sir William Halcrow & Partners
Ltd, Swindon
Halcrow Group Ltd and Babtie Brown and Root  2004 Lower
Thames study – phase 1: final report  Sir William Halcrow &
Partners Ltd, Swindon
Hall J W, Dawson R J, Sayers P B, Rosu C, Chatterton J B and
Deakin R 2003a A methodology for national-scale flood risk
assessment Proceedings of the Institution of Civic Engineers
Water and Maritime Engineering 156 235–47
Hall J, Evans E P, Penning-Rowsell E C, Sayers P B, Thorne C R
and Saul A J  2003 Quantified scenarios analysis of drivers
and impacts of changing flood risk in England and Wales:
2030–2100 Environmental Hazards 5 51–65
Hayek F A 1944 The road to serfdom Routledge, London
HM Government  2005 Securing the future: delivering UK
sustainable development strategy  The UK government
sustainable development strategy Cm 6467 HM Government,
London.
HM Revenue and Customs 2006 Number of taxpayers and regis-
tered traders Table 1.4 Income tax statistics and distributions
(http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/stats/tax_receipts/1_4_apr06.pdf)
Accessed 7 December
HM Treasury 2003 The green book: appraisal and evaluation
in central government HM Treasury, London
Horner R W  1972 Current proposals for the Thames Barrier
and the organization of the investigations Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Math-
ematical and Physical Sciences 272 179–85
Howe J and White I  2001 Flooding: are we ignoring the real
problem and solution? Regional Studies 35 368–71
Huber M 2004 Reforming the UK flood insurance regime: the
breakdown of a gentlemen’s agreement  ESRC Centre for the
Analysis of Risk and Regulation discussion paper no. 18
London School of Economics and Political Science, London
ICE 2001 Learning to live with rivers. Final report of the Institu-
tion of Civil Engineers’ presidential commission to review the
technical aspects of flood risk management in England and
Wales Institution of Civil Engineers, London
Johnson C, Penning-Rowsell E and Tapsell S 2007 Aspiration
and reality: flood policy, economic damages and the
appraisal process Area 39 214–23
Johnson C L, Tunstall S M and Penning-Rowsell E C  2004
Crises as catalysts for adaptation: human response to major
floods ESRC Environment and Human Behaviour Research
Report RES-221-25-0037 Flood Hazard Research Centre
Publication 511 Middlesex University, Enfield
Johnson C L, Tunstall S M and Penning-Rowsell E C  2005
Floods as catalysts for policy change: historical lessons from
England and Wales International Journal of Water Resources
Development 21 561–75
MAFF (Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food ) 1993
Strategy for flood and coastal defence  MAFF/Welsh
Office, London
MAFF 1999 Flood and coastal defence project appraisal
guidance (3): economic appraisal FCDPAG3 MAFF, London
McCarthy S, Parker D J and Penning-Rowsell E C  2006
Preconsultation social survey, community based flood risk
reduction options reach 4: Walton Bridge to Teddington. Flood
Hazard Research Centre, Middlesex University, London
Mill J S 1863 Utilitarianism Dent, London.
Miller D  1999 Principles of social justice  Harvard University
Press, Cambridge MA
National Audit Office forthcoming Report on the Jubilee River
NAO, London
Nozick R 1974 Anarchy, state and utopia Blackwell, Oxford
ODPM (Office of the Deputy Prime Minister ) 2002 Preparing
for floods. Interim guidance for improving the flood
resistance of domestic and small business properties  ODPM,
London
ODPM 2003a Sustainable communities: building for the future
ODPM, London
ODPM 2003b Preparing for floods ODPM, London
Parker D J  1995 Floodplain development policy in England
and Wales Applied Geography 15 341–63
Penning-Rowsell E, Johnson C and Tunstall S  2006 ‘Signals’
from pre-crisis discourse: lessons from UK flooding for global
environmental policy change? Global Environmental Change
16 323–39
Penning-Rowsell E, Johnson C, Tunstall S, Tapsell S, Morris J,
Chatterton J and Green C  2005 The benefits of flood and
coastal risk management: a manual of assessment techniques
Middlesex University Press, London
Penning-Rowsell E C and Wilson T  2006 Gauging the impact
of natural hazards: the pattern and cost of emergency
response during flood events Transactions of the Institute of
British Geographers 31 99–115
Priest S J, Clark M J and Treby E J  2005 Flood insurance: the
challenge of the uninsured Area 37 295–302
Rawls J  1971 A theory of justice  Harvard University Press,
Cambridge MA
Rawls J 2001 Justice as fairness: a restatement  Harvard Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge MA
Sen A 1992 Inequality re-examined Clarendon Press, Oxford
Sir William Halcrow & Partners Ltd  1990 Datchet, Wraysbury,
Staines and Chertsey flood study: floodplain management
plan, hydraullic modelling, engineering and benefit assessment
– main report Sir William Halcrow & Partners Ltd, Swindon
Sir William Halcrow & Partners Ltd  1992 Datchet, Wraysbury,
Staines and Chertsey flood study: floodplain management
plan, hydraullic modelling and engineering – main report  Sir
William Halcrow & Partners Ltd, Swindon
Swift A  2001 Political philosophy. A beginners’ guide for
students and politicians Polity Press, Cambridge
Syme G J and Nancarrow B E  eds 2001 Applying social justice
research to environmental decision making Social Justice
Research 14 4 (special issue)
Syme G J, Nancarrow B E and McCreddin J A  1999 Defining
the components of fairness in the allocation of water to envi-
ronmental uses Journal of Environmental Management  57
51–70
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 17]]
390 ‘Fair’ flood risk management policy in England
Geographical Journal Vol. 173 No. 4, pp. 374–390, 2007
© 2007 The Author(s). Journal compilation © 2007 The Royal Geographical Society
Tapsell S M, Burton R, Parker D J and Oakes S  2004 The
social performance of flood warning communication technolo-
gies Environment Agency R&D Technical Report Project
W5C-016 EA, Bristol
Tapsell S, Penning-Rowsell E, Tunstall S and Wilson T  2002
Vulnerability to flooding: health and social dimensions Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society 360 1511–25
Thrush D, Burningham K and Fielding J  2005a Vulnerability
with regard to flood warning and flood event: a review of the
literature Environment Agency R&D Technical Report Project
W5C-018/1 EA, Bristol
Thrush D, Burningham K and Fielding J  2005b Exploring flood-
related vulnerability: a qualitative study Environment Agency
R&D Technical Report Project W5C-018/3 EA, Bristol
Tisdell J G  2003 Equity and social justice in water doctrines
Social Justice Research 16 401–16
Tunstall S M, Johnson C L and Penning-Rowsell E C  2004
Flood hazard management in England and Wales: from
land drainage to flood risk management World Congress
on Natural Disaster Mitigation Proceedings  Volume 2 19–22
February 2004, Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi 447–54
UN/ISDR (United Nations/Inter-agency secretariat of the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction ) 2004 Living
with risk. A global review of disaster reduction initiatives
UN/ISDR, Geneva
van Haegen M S  2005 Foreword in van Alphen J, van Beck E
and Taal M  eds Floods, from defence to management
Symposium papers: 3rd international symposium on flood
defence Neigmegen A.A. Balkem, Leiden.
Walker G, Fairburn J, Smith G and Mitchell G  2003 Environ-
mental quality and social deprivation EA, Bristol
Walzer M 1983 Spheres of justice: a defence of pluralism and
equality Blackwell, Oxford
Whyley C, McCormick J and Kempson E  1998 Paying for
peace of mind: access to home contents insurance for low-
income households Policy Studies Institute, London
Wisner B, Blaikie P, Cannon T and Davis I  2004 At risk:
natural hazards, people’s vulnerability and disasters  2nd
ed Routledge, London and New York
Wolf A T  1999 Criteria for equitable allocations: the heart
of international water conflict Natural Resources Forum 23
3–30
 14754959, 2007, 4, Downloaded from https://rgs-ibg.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2007.00256.x by Humboldt-Universitat Zu Berlin, Wiley Online Library on [18/08/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
