[[PAGE 1]]
 
     
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
    
 
     
 
    
    
   
    
    
    
   
 
    
   
   
   
   
   
 
DEPA
RTMENT OF THE ARMY ER 1105-2-101 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
CECW-CP Washington, DC  20314-1000 
CECW-CE 
Regulation 
No. 1105-2-101 15 July 2019 
Planning 
RISK ASSESSMENT FOR FLOOD RISK MANAGEMENT STUDIES 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Paragraph Page 
1. Purpose ......................................................................................................................1 
2. Applicability..............................................................................................................1 
3. Distribution Statement...............................................................................................1 
4. References .................................................................................................................1 
5. Context ......................................................................................................................2 
6. Background ...............................................................................................................3 
7. Variables in a Risk Assessment.................................................................................5 
8. Policy and Required Procedures................................................................................6 
9. Example Displays of Risk Assessment Results ......................................................11 
Appendixes 
Appendix A: Example Displays of Project Engineering and Economic Performance..................13 
Table List 
Table 1: Project Performance; AEP, Long Term Exceedance Probability and Assurance ...11 
Table A1: Expected value and probabilistic values of EAD and EAD reduced ......................12 
Table A2: Expected value and probabilistic values of costs ....................................................13 
Table A3: Performance described by AEP and LTEP .............................................................15 
Table A4: Performance described by AEP and LTEP (alternative display) ............................15 
Table A5: Probability comparison............................................................................................17 
Table A6: Life Loss..................................................................................................................19 
Figure List 
Figure 1: Risk conceptualized...................................................................................................4 
Figure A1: Expected value and probabilistic values for net benefits ........................................13 
Figure A2: Expected value and probabilistic values for Benefit/Cost Ratios ...........................14 
Figure A3: AEP uncertainty ......................................................................................................16 
Figure A4: Assurance (also CNP) .............................................................................................18 
Figure A5: Example scenario ....................................................................................................19 
Glossary 
ER
 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 i 

[[PAGE 2]]
 
    
 
 THIS PAGE IS LEFT BLANK INTENTIONALLY 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 ii 

[[PAGE 3]]
 
     
   
  
      
    
  
   
    
 
 
       
   
   
   
    
   
      
 
     
 
  
      
 
      
 
     
   
      
 
   
 
 
1. Purpose. This regulation provides guidance on risk assessment requirements for flood 
management studies including but not limited to feasibility studies, post-authorization changes, 
general reevaluation studies, dam and levee safety studies, and major rehabilitation studies.  This 
regulation is jointly promulgated by Planning and Engineering. The risk framework is a 
decision-making process that comprises three tasks: risk assessment, risk communication, and 
risk management, which can be advantageously applied to a variety of water resources 
management problems. These requirements are part of a broader decision-making process that 
includes similar assessments for risks to the natural environment as well as the social and 
cultural well-being of people potentially impacted by flood management activities. 
2. Applicability. This regulation is applicable to all U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
Headquarters (HQUSACE) elements, major subordinate commands, districts, laboratories, and 
field operating agencies having civil works responsibilities.  This regulation applies to all 
implementation studies for flood risk management projects: riverine and coastal. 
3. Distribution Statement. Approved for public release, distribution is unlimited. 
4. References. 
a. Engineer Regulation (ER) 5-1-11, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Business Process. 
(https://www.publications.usace.army.mil/USACE-Publications/Engineer-Regulations/) 
b. ER 1105-2-100, Guidance for Conducting Civil Works Planning Studies. 
(https://www.publications.usace.army.mil/USACE-Publications/Engineer-Regulations/) 
c. ER 1110-2-401, Operation, Maintenance, Repair, Replacement, and Rehabilitation 
Manual for Projects and Separable Elements Managed by Project Sponsors. 
(https://www.publications.usace.army.mil/USACE-Publications/Engineer-Regulations/) 
d. ER 1110-2-1156, Safety of Dams – Policy and Procedures. 
(https://www.publications.usace.army.mil/USACE-Publications/Engineer-Regulations/) 
e. Engineer Manual (EM) 1110-2-1619, Risk Assessment for Flood Risk Management 
Studies. (https://www.publications.usace.army.mil/USACE-Publications/Engineer-Manuals/) 
f. Engineer Pamphlet (EP) 1110-2-8, Explaining Flood Risk. 
(https://www.publications.usace.army.mil/USACE-Publications/Engineer-Pamphlets/) 
g. Specific Measurable Attainable Risk Informed Timely (SMART) Planning Guide 
(https://planning.erdc.dren.mil/toolbox/smart.cfm) 
*This regulation supersedes ER 1105-2-101 dated 17 July 2017. 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 1 

[[PAGE 4]]
 
    
       
   
 
    
      
 
  
   
    
    
    
  
 
   
 
        
   
 
      
   
  
   
     
    
    
  
  
 
     
       
      
      
    
   
          
    
h. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), Hydrologic Engineering Center, 2010. “Flood 
Damage Reduction Analysis (HEC-FDA),” Version 1.2.5.  Davis, CA. 
(http://www.hec.usace.army.mil/software/hec-fda/) 
i. National Research Council, 1995. “Flood Risk Management and the American River 
Basin: An Evaluation.” Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
(https://www.nap.edu/catalog/4969/flood-risk-management-and-the-american-river-basin-an-
evaluation) 
j. “Transforming the Corps into a Risk Managing Organization,” 26 November 2007.  
Contributing Authors:  Dr. David Moser, USACE, Institute for Water Resources; Todd Bridges, 
USACE, Engineer Research and Development Center; Steven Cone, USACE, Institute for Water 
Resources; Yacov Haimes, University of Virginia; Brian K. Harper, USACE, Institute for Water 
Resources; Leonard Shabman, Resources for the Future; and Dr. Charles Yoe, College of Notre 
Dame. 
(http://www.corpsriskanalysisgateway.us/data/docs/ref/Explore%20Resources/IWR%20Reports/W 
hite_Paper-Transforming_the_Corps_into_a_Risk_Managing_Org.pdf) 
k. “USACE Resilience Initiative Roadmap 2016,” 16 May 2016. 
(http://cdm16021.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/ref/collection/p16021coll6/id/1617#img_view_containe 
r) 
l. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Risk Management Center, Best Practices in Dam and 
Levee Safety Risk Analysis. (https://www.usbr.gov/ssle/damsafety/risk/BestPractices/Chapters/I-
0-20150612.pdf) 
5. Context. Since the enactment of the Flood Control Act of 1917, USACE has played a 
significant federal role in managing flood risk nationwide. Flood risk management is the process 
of identifying, evaluating, selecting, implementing, monitoring, and modifying actions taken to 
reduce and manage risk through shared responsibilities.  Scientifically sound, cost-effective, 
integrated actions are taken to achieve flood risk management. Social, cultural, ethical, 
environmental, fiscal, political, and legal considerations are accounted for in the process. Still, 
USACE recognizes that more needs to be done to assess, manage, and communicate flood risks. 
In 2006, USACE established the National Flood Risk Management Program to advance the goals 
of flood risk identification, communication, response, and management services across all levels 
of government to save lives and reduce property damage in the event of floods and coastal 
storms. All flood risk managers must balance the insights of USACE’s professional staff with 
stakeholder concerns for such matters as residual risks, life safety, reliability, resiliency, and cost 
while acknowledging that no single solution will meet all objectives, and tradeoffs must always 
be made. Resilience is inherent to flood risk management, and it is the overall ability to 
anticipate, prepare for, and adapt to changing conditions and withstand, respond to, and recover 
from adverse events, including the ability to avoid, minimize, withstand, and recover from the 
adverse effects of a flood. Resilience also refers to the capacity or ability of a project or system 
to absorb disturbance and still retain its basic function and structure. For example, project 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 2 

[[PAGE 5]]
 
     
    
    
   
  
    
     
    
    
   
  
      
  
  
   
     
   
     
    
     
     
    
     
    
    
      
 
        
    
   
  
     
  
  
     
    
    
    
       
 
  
resilience measures for a levee embankment can be provided by various forms of surface 
hardening, armoring, or resistance to overtopping scour. These measures provide a higher 
degree of predictability for levee performance. 
6. Background. 
a. No project or action that is proposed, evaluated, adopted, and implemented can 
completely eliminate or mitigate flood risks. Further, the information used to estimate flood risk, 
formulate and evaluate plans, and determine the results of the analyses is uncertain. All measured 
or estimated values in project development are to various degrees inaccurate— reflecting both 
inherent natural variability in flooding phenomena (e.g., cyclical rainfall patterns) and lack of 
knowledge in estimating various parameters (e.g., estimation of Manning’s n-value) relevant to 
project works and their performance.  Pursuing the management of flood risk within the risk 
framework is an explicit means of better understanding both the flooding and associated 
consequences, and the uncertainty in their estimation, and thus should support development of 
robust strategies for managing flood risk. 
b. The risk framework is a decision-making process that comprises three tasks: risk 
assessment, risk communication, and risk management.  Risk assessment is a systematic approach 
for describing the nature of the flood risk, including the likelihood and severity of consequences. 
Risk assessments are quantitative whenever possible; however, qualitative assessments may be 
appropriate for some activities. Risk assessment includes explicit acknowledgment of the 
uncertainties in the parameters used to compute risk. Risk management is a decision-making 
process in which risk-reducing and resilience-increasing actions are identified, evaluated, 
implemented, and monitored. The purpose of risk management is to take actions to effectively 
reduce and manage risks identified in the risk assessment. Risk communication is a collaborative 
exchange of information among the risk assessors and those who will use the risk assessment 
results and/or those who are affected by the risks and risk management actions.  Open 
communication improves the understanding of the risks by all parties, and leads to improved risk 
assessments and risk management decisions and outcomes. Documenting the results of a risk 
assessment framework is an important part of the process, and examples are included in Appendix 
A. Clearly presenting the findings of the risk assessment will help inform discussions with 
sponsors, stakeholders, and others; however, documentation alone will not fully convey the highly 
technical nature of risk assessment results. Open dialogue will likely be required to ensure a 
sufficient and common understanding of the risk assessment and mitigation options leading to the 
selection of most appropriate actions. 
c. A risk framework process can be advantageously applied to a variety of water resources 
management problems, including those involving flooding.  The approach captures and quantifies 
the extent of the risk and uncertainty in the various project development components of an 
investment decision.  The total effect of uncertainty on the project formulation and consequent 
performance related to life safety, economic, social, and environmental concerns can be examined 
and conscious decisions made reflecting an explicit tradeoff between risks, performance, and costs.  
Risk assessments can be used to compare plans in terms of their physical performance, economic 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 3 

[[PAGE 6]]
 
    
 
 
    
        
    
   
   
 
      
      
  
   
    
     
         
    
    
     
 
   
      
  
      
       
       
    
  
  
success, residual risks, and impacts to life, health, and the environment, including their 
uncertainties. 
d. Budget constraints for plan selection, increased partner cost-sharing, the public’s interest 
in project performance, and concern for life safety as well as social and environmental matters 
must be addressed in the analysis of federal water resources investments.  Explicit consideration of 
risk and uncertainty can help address these issues and improve investment decisions. 
e. Risk is broadly defined as a situation or event where something of value is at stake and its 
gain or loss is uncertain.  Risk is typically expressed as a combination of the likelihood and 
consequence of an event. Consequences are measured in terms of harm to people, cost, time, 
environmental harm, property damage, and other metrics. Choosing the appropriate risk metrics 
and actively using them in decision-making is critical to effective risk management in support of a 
vibrant economy, thriving ecosystems, and sustainable communities. Flood risk considers 
explicitly the performance consequences of subjecting people and property to the entire range of 
likely flood events, given risk management provided by any structural or non-structural measures. 
One commonly used metric of economic risk is expected annual damage (EAD) or average annual 
equivalent damage when computed on an annual basis over the period of analysis. 
f. Flood risk can be conceptualized as a function of the hazard, performance, exposure, 
vulnerability, and consequences as depicted in Figure 1. 
Figure 1: Risk conceptualized 
(1) The “hazard” is what causes the harm: in this case, a flood. The flood hazard is described 
in terms of frequency, stage, velocity, extent, and depth. 
(2) “Performance” is the system’s reaction to the hazard. In Figure 1, performance refers to 
the system features and the capability to contain/manage the flood hazard for the full range of 
possible events and as a single event or load. In this regulation, this would be termed “system 
performance.” Performance also refers to the metric that describes the capability of the system to 
accommodate a single event (Assurance; also Conditional Non-exceedance Probability, CNP) and 
the full range of events: Annual Exceedance Probability (AEP) and Long-Term Exceedance 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 4 

[[PAGE 7]]
 
     
         
     
    
    
      
  
       
     
         
    
      
    
    
      
    
    
      
   
  
      
 
  
   
   
    
    
      
      
   
   
  
  
    
     
        
Probability (LTEP). There are other definitions of performance in addition to system performance. 
Performance can also be described by levee breach from loading below the top of levee probability 
functions, the interior-exterior functions for leveed areas, unregulated-regulated transforms for 
reservoirs and diversions, and elevation-discharge functions (rating curves) for channels. These 
also would be considered “system performance.” When the structural integrity of a system or 
system component is discussed, such as the fragility function, the reference would be termed 
“structural performance.” When the economics of a system are discussed, the reference would be 
termed “economic performance” as expressed by EAD and EAD reduced. 
(3) “Exposure” describes who and what may be harmed by the flood hazard. Exposure 
incorporates a description of where the flooding occurs at a given frequency and what exists in that 
area. Tools such as flood inundation maps provide information on the extent and depth of 
flooding; structure inventories, population data, crop data, and habitat acreage provide information 
on the population and property that may be affected by the flood hazard. 
(4) “Vulnerability” is the susceptibility to harm human beings, property, and the 
environment when exposed to the hazard. Depth-damage functions, depth-mortality functions, and 
other similar relationships can be used to describe vulnerability. 
(5) “Consequence” is the harm that results from a single occurrence of the hazard. 
Consequences are measured in terms of metrics such as economic damage, acreage of habitat lost, 
value of crops damaged, and lives lost. 
(6) “Economic risk” is the combination of likelihood and harm to property, infrastructure, 
and other assets as well as economic systems (all measured in monetary terms). A common metric 
of economic risk is EAD. 
(7) “Life loss consequence” is the determination of the population at risk and the estimated 
statistical life loss. 
7. Variables in a Risk Assessment. 
a. The true values of variables and parameters are recognized as important to project 
development decisions, are frequently not known with certainty, and can take on a range of values.  
The likelihood of a quantity or parameter taking on a particular value can be described by a 
probability distribution and the probability distribution may be described by its own parameters, 
such as mean and variance for a normal distribution. Quantitative risk assessment combines the 
information about the parameters with underlying uncertainty information within a computational 
model so that the engineering performance and associated consequences are determined on a 
statistical basis represented by a probability distribution. Consequences of interest include 
potential for life loss and economic losses and environmental impacts of a proposed project. 
b. A variety of variables and their associated uncertainties may be incorporated into the risk 
assessment of a flood risk management study. For example, economic variables in an urban 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 5 

[[PAGE 8]]
 
    
   
   
     
    
      
     
    
   
    
       
   
   
      
 
  
   
    
   
    
        
       
    
  
  
       
   
      
     
   
      
  
  
      
       
      
   
   
    
   
      
      
situation may include, but are not necessarily limited to depth-damage curves, structure values, 
content values, structure first-floor elevations, structure types, flood warning times, and flood 
evacuation effectiveness. Uncertainties in economic variables include building valuations, inexact 
knowledge of structure type or of actual contents, method of determining first-floor elevations, or 
timing of initiation of flood warnings. Other key variables and associated uncertainties include the 
hydrologic and hydraulic conditions of the system. Uncertainties related to changing climate 
should be addressed using the current USACE policy and technical guidance. Uncertainty in the 
likelihood of particular discharge and stage exists because record lengths are often short or do not 
exist where needed, and the effectiveness of flood flow regulation measures is not precisely 
known. Uncertainty in discharge also comes from estimation of parameters used in rainfall runoff 
computations, such as precipitation and infiltration. Examples of uncertainty factors that affect 
stage might include conveyance roughness, cross-section geometry, debris accumulation, ice 
effects, sediment transport, flow regime, and bed form. Uncertainty factors that affect the safety of 
human life include the number of routes of egress, time of day, distance to dry land, water 
temperature, number of multi-storied structures, demographics, and the existence and adherence to 
an emergency action plan. Not all variables are critical to project justification in every instance. 
To achieve the ultimate goal, the risk assessment and study effort should concentrate on the 
uncertainties of those variables having a significant impact on study conclusions and 
recommendations. SMART Planning Principles (Reference 4g) promotes balancing the level of 
uncertainty and risk with the level of detail of the study. The level of detail required to make 
planning decisions will grow over the course of the study, as the study team moves from an array 
of alternatives to a single recommended alternative. For technical details on how to address these 
uncertainties, see Reference 4b. 
8. Policy and Required Procedures. 
a. All flood risk management studies will adopt the risk framework as described herein.  
The risk framework approach and results of a risk assessment will be documented in the principal 
decision document. The types of documents involved include but are not limited to: feasibility 
reports, general and limited reevaluation reports, and project modification impact reports including 
water control manuals that reallocate storage requiring reauthorization, and design documentation 
reports. Project Management Plans (PMPs) will describe the methods to be used to quantify the 
uncertainties of the key variables, parameters, and components and the approach to combining 
these uncertainties into higher-level measures for determining overall engineering performance, 
life loss, and economic and environmental consequences (Reference 4b).  In developing the PMP 
for a proposed feasibility study, the level of detail of a risk assessment will be developed to the task 
level and included in the PMP. In cases where a general reevaluation report is proposed and where 
deterministic assumptions including standard superiority assumptions or other engineering 
standards were used that are critical to sizing and/or performance of project features, a 
reformulation of the project using a risk assessment, as described in this regulation, will be 
undertaken to determine the appropriate project for construction recommendation. 
b. The ultimate goal of a risk assessment is a comprehensive approach in which the values 
of all key variables, parameters, and components of flood risk management studies are subject to 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 6 

[[PAGE 9]]
 
     
    
      
  
    
    
 
     
    
    
  
     
  
    
   
 
    
   
     
    
  
 
  
 
    
    
  
      
 
   
  
     
       
      
     
   
probabilistic analysis.  Not all variables are critical to project justification in every instance. To 
achieve the ultimate goal, the risk assessment and study effort should evaluate the impact of 
various variables and their uncertainties, and concentrate on the variables having a significant 
impact on study conclusions.  When a more detailed assessment is required, at a minimum 
uncertainty in the following variables and relationships must be explicitly incorporated in the risk 
assessment: 
(1) Stage-damage functions from economic studies (with emphasis on structure first-floor 
elevation, depth-percent damage relationships, and content and structure values for urban studies). 
For studies in agriculture areas, other variables (e.g., time of year, crop type, costs of production) 
will be key and should be used in the economic analysis. 
(2) Discharge-frequency functions from hydrologic studies (with emphasis on the record 
length or hydrologic modeling parameters). 
(3) Stage-frequency functions from hydrologic/hydraulic studies (with emphasis on the 
record length). A stage-frequency analysis may be used when stage gage data is all that is 
available for a study and/or when there is no unique correspondence between flow and stage such 
as in locations highly controlled by backwater or tidal conditions or in the case of ice jam floods. 
Care should be taken in using this approach because in current analysis practice all uncertainties 
are collapsed into a single uncertainty as defined by the period of record. 
(4) Regulated-unregulated transform function from reservoir regulation studies (with 
emphasis on operational uncertainties, inflow hydrographs, and rating uncertainties of outlet 
works). 
(5) Stage-discharge functions from hydraulic studies (with emphasis on conveyance 
roughness and cross-section geometry). 
(6) Stage-probability of failure or unsatisfactory performance functions (fragility curves, 
system performance probability curves) for mechanical, electrical, structural, and geotechnical 
performance of structures as defined in latest guidance. 
(7) Stage-life loss function from life safety studies (with emphasis on rate and depth of 
flooding, population at risk, and emergency response plans). 
(8) Stage-environmental impact considerations (emphasis on the key ecological and other 
factors impacting the environment). 
c. Consistent with the Principles and Guidelines the National Economic Development 
(NED) Plan must be identified. The NED Plan is the alternative plan that reasonably maximizes 
net economic benefits consistent with protecting the nation’s environment. NED will be calculated 
explicitly including uncertainties in the key variables specified in the risk register. Consideration 
of increments in project scale different from the NED Plan, as well as other plans preferred by the 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 7 

[[PAGE 10]]
 
    
    
   
       
      
       
 
     
        
      
    
   
     
       
     
   
      
     
     
  
    
    
 
    
      
   
     
 
      
      
 
    
       
       
    
cost-sharing sponsor, may be considered. Flood risk management actions may be part of multi-
objective plans as described in Reference 4b. 
d. The estimate of net NED benefits and benefit/cost (B/C) ratio will be reported both as an 
expected (mean) value and on a probabilistic basis for each alternative. The probability that net 
benefits are positive and that the B/C ratio is at or above one (1.0) will be presented for each 
alternative. 
e. The flood risk management performance of a plan will be presented for the system as a 
whole over the plan’s given lifecycle and for each component that makes up that system. 
Typically, the system performance will reflect that of the “weakest” component. Reporting the 
performance of individual components may assist in the selection of future risk reduction 
measures, although consequences should be considered in these decisions as well. The risk 
assessment will quantify the performance, resilience, and risk of all scales of all alternatives 
considered in formulating the recommendation. The assessment will evaluate and report residual 
risk, which includes consequences of project performance or capacity exceedance. This 
assessment requires explicit consideration of the joint effects of the uncertainties associated with 
key hydrologic, hydraulic, and geotechnical variables and character of floodplain occupancy. This 
performance will be reported in the following ways (see glossary for definition of terms): 
(1) AEP (metric, value, and designation of with/without performance) with associated 
description of uncertainty. 
(2) LTEP over 10, 30, and 50 years. 
(3) Assurance (also CNP) for the 0.2, 0.1, 0.02, 0.01, 0.004, and 0.002 events. Assurance 
can be computed using either a discharge-frequency or stage-frequency function. 
(4) The Assurance (also CNP) for specific historic floods. 
(5) Economic average annual and single event damage, potential life loss, and environmental 
conditions and impacts as required by ER 1105-2-100 (Reference 4b). 
(6) Qualitative and quantitative statement of residual, transformed, and/or transferred risk 
(paragraph 8g). 
f. An assessment of potential life loss, economic, and environmental damage for the 
without condition, along with all proposed alternatives is required. For studies where life loss 
plays a significant role in formulating and evaluating alternatives, and selecting the recommended 
plan, a quantitative assessment of life loss will be performed using accepted USACE methods and 
tools. As with the economic damage assessment, explicit consideration of the effects of the 
uncertainties associated with key input variables is required. Key input variables in the life loss 
estimate include, but are not limited to: warning time, warning effectiveness (both how quickly a 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 8 

[[PAGE 11]]
 
     
 
    
    
        
    
  
     
      
          
    
  
   
      
   
   
   
     
    
   
     
     
     
    
    
     
    
  
     
   
     
   
    
          
        
      
        
   
    
    
    
   
warning spreads among the population at risk (PAR) as well as the response to a warning by PAR), 
flood arrival time, and fatality rate thresholds. 
g. The probability distribution of residual flood damage and other relevant aspects of 
residual risks (transformed or transferred) will also be displayed. Residual flood risk is the flood 
risk that remains after a proposed flood risk management project is implemented. Residual risk 
includes the consequence of capacity exceedance as well as consideration of project performance, 
robustness, and resiliency. Transformed risk is a risk that emerges or increases as a result of 
mitigating another risk. Conceptually, a transferred risk relocates risk or increases risk from 
Region A of a system to Region B of the system as a result of action taken in Region A. T he 
nature of the risk of flooding is different with a levee versus without a levee. A levee reduces the 
likelihood that existing improved property will be flooded but can often encourage new 
development, which can lead to an overall increase in risk if not managed effectively through 
proper land use and building codes. A levee may transform the flood risk from gradual and 
observable long before action is necessary to sudden and catastrophic. The residual risk, including 
transformed and/or transferred, will be reported as the expected annual probability of each 
alternative being exceeded with consideration of unsatisfactory project performance and the 
associated consequences. For comparison, the without-project risk in terms of the annual 
probability of flood damage occurring and the annual probability of other property hazards (fire, 
wind, etc.) will be displayed. To aid this display and to improve the understanding of the residual 
risk, inundation maps will be provided showing flood depths should the project be exceeded. A 
narrative scenario for events that result in flooding will be provided (see Figure A-5 for an 
example). An emergency action plan or community preparedness plan should also be presented as 
required by ER 1110-2-401 (Reference 4c). The impacts to residual human health, safety risks, 
and the environment should be discussed. Both the inundation map and the narrative scenario will 
be provided for each alternative considered for final selection. 
h. All project increments comprise different risk management alternatives represented by 
the tradeoffs among engineering performance, project cost, economic and environmental 
resilience, and life loss consequences. These increments contain differences in flood damage 
reduced, residual risk, local and federal project cost, impacts to the environment, and life loss. 
USACE must effectively communicate to local sponsors and residents so they understand these 
tradeoffs and can participate fully in informing the decision-making process. 
i. Many existing USACE projects were authorized and/or designed to the Standard Project 
Flood (SPF). The SPF is defined in several legacy ER and EM guidance documents, but the SPF is 
no longer a design target. USACE policy (Reference 4b) states that risk analysis (now risk 
framework) is to be used, to include the evaluation of a full range of floods (including those that 
would exceed the SPF) that will be used in the formulation and evaluation of alternatives. 
Comparing performance of the NED Plan and other candidate plans, given the occurrence of the 
SPF event, (a rare but historically understood flood event) can play a useful role in the assessment 
of residual risks to inform the decision-making process. As a consequence, while current guidance 
on project formulation and alternative selection governs, the SPF may have a useful role for 
evaluating residual risks, for comparing new project proposals with nearby existing projects that 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 9 

[[PAGE 12]]
 
    
    
 
  
    
      
       
   
     
  
      
 
        
   
    
     
       
    
   
     
       
     
     
   
  
     
      
   
     
    
    
    
    
      
   
 
were based on the SPF, and as a check and validation of floods computed from statistical 
frequency analysis. 
j. Special Guidance. 
(1) The use of explicit freeboard or similar buffers to account for hydrologic, hydraulic, 
geotechnical, and other uncertainties will no longer be used for levee planning and design. 
Similarly, the use of freeboard to account for the same uncertainties will no longer be used in 
channel planning and design. 
(2) Risk assessments for dams and levees must also follow other applicable USACE policy 
guidelines, such as Reference 4d. 
(3) Evaluation of a levee system for the National Flood Insurance Program must follow 
current USACE policy and guidelines. 
(4) Project performance will be described by AEP (metric, value, and description of with/ 
without performance) with uncertainty, Assurance (also CNP), and LTEP.  The array of all 
performance indices should be displayed on a system-wide basis and on individual components 
that make up the system. EP 1110-2-8 (Reference 4f) describes techniques in effectively 
communicating flood risk to local officials and the public. A legacy term, Level of Protection 
(LOP) was used as a performance index and a levee design concept that was founded on the 
principle of providing a high degree of Assurance that the levee system component would neither 
breach nor overtop when loaded with a specific recurrence interval flood (e.g., providing a 75-year 
LOP if it could contain that event with 90 percent level of Assurance). The recurrence interval of 
the flood hazard for this design principle was then used as an expression of the performance of the 
levee system. The term is no longer used as it did not include residual risk or structural 
performance. LOP should not be used to judge a set of alternatives or to target a specific project 
size. 
(5) Economic analyses will compute the NED Plan utilizing benefits at the mean of the 
probability distribution consistent with ER 1105-2-100. Once the NED (or other Federally 
Recommended Plan) has been identified, project performance will be communicated in multiple 
ways, including but not limited to: AEP, LTEP, and Assurance (CNP) over a variety of flood 
events as shown in the Table 1, to include at least the 2%, 1%, and 0.4% annual exceedance events. 
When it is necessary to communicate performance in simpler terms for this plan, then the 
exceedance probability at which the project performs with 90% Assurance must be used in 
feasibility, design, and in communications with the public.  Performance for a project having the 
example data in Table 1 may be communicated as: “Given irreducible uncertainties inherent in 
flood frequency analysis, the NED Plan will pass the 2% event with 90% assurance.” This is 
consistent with standard engineering practice and with the risk expectations of the public. 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 10 

[[PAGE 13]]


[[PAGE 14]]
 
    
 
  
 
  
      
   
   
    
  
   
 
  
 
     
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
        
        
        
        
        
        
                     
     
 
Appendix A 
Example Displays of Project Engineering and Economic Performance 
Results from Risk Assessment 
To report probabilistic outputs, a selection of these tables and figures, along with an 
accompanying textual explanation, should be chosen to communicate uncertainty information.  
This information can be useful in aiding decisions by local sponsors, stakeholders, and Federal 
officials by helping to increase their understanding of the uncertainty inherent in each alternative. 
A-1. Table A1 contains the EAD for the without-project condition and the with-project 
condition for each alternative.  The computed values of EAD are uncertain, and their probability 
distributions, resulting from the risk and uncertainty assessment described in this ER, are 
represented in various ways.  The values of EAD reported are each the mean of the probability 
(uncertainty) distribution of that alternative.  The damage reduced (without-project minus with-
project EAD) is reported with more information about its probability (uncertainty) distribution. 
In addition to the mean, the standard deviation and the quartiles of the distribution are included.  
The standard deviation describes the width of the probability distribution.  The quartiles are the 
values of the probability distribution with cumulative probabilities of 25, 50, and 75 percent— 
meaning there is the specified likelihood that the value will be greater than the quartile, so these 
values describe both the width and the asymmetry of the probability distribution.  There is a 50 
percent chance that the actual value of damage reduced is between the 0.25 and 0.75 quartiles.  
The 0.5 quartile is the median estimate, meaning there is a 50 percent chance the actual value is 
greater, and 50 percent chance it is less.  The median differs from the mean when the probability 
distribution is asymmetrical. 
Table A1 
Expected value and probabilistic values of EAD and EAD reduced 
Alternati ve 
EAD 
($1,000) 
Damage Reduced 
($1,000) 
Uncertainty in EAD Reduced; 
Probability Distribution 
Quartiles ($1,000) 
Without 
Alternative 
With 
Alternative Mean 
Standard 
Deviation 0.75 0.50* 0.25 
20-ft (6-m) levee 575 220 355 57 316 353 393 
25-ft (8-m) levee 575 75 500 77 451 503 555 
30-ft (9-m) levee 575 5 570 98 502 573 626 
Channel 575 200 375 65 328 370 415 
Detention basin 575 250 325 93 263 325 388 
Relocation 575 220 355 61 313 353 396 
* The 0.5 quartile is the median estimate; it differs from the mean when the probability distribution is asymmetrical. 
A-2. Table A2 provides the same information about annual cost as Table A1 provides for 
damage reduced. 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 12 

[[PAGE 15]]
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
      
      
      
      
      
      
    
  
     
    
   
    
    
 
     
Table A2 
Expected value and probabilistic values of costs 
Alternative 
Annual Cost 
($1000) 
Uncertainty in Cost; 
Probability Distribution Quartiles ($1000) 
Mean 
Standard 
Deviation 0.75 0.50 0.25 
20-ft (6-m) levee 300 40 273 300 327 
25-ft (8-m) levee 400 45 370 400 430 
30-ft (9-m) levee 550 60 510 550 590 
Channel 300 30 280 300 320 
Detention basin 275 10 268 275 282 
Relocation 250 20 237 250 263 
A-3. Figure A1 contains a summary of the expected (mean) values of benefits (damage reduced) 
and Costs, and more probabilistic information about the Net Benefits (benefits minus costs).  The 
probability distribution of net benefits is described by the expected (mean) value, the standard 
deviation, and the quartile values, as described in Table A1.  In addition, the probability that net 
benefits are in fact greater than zero is included.  The graphs display the entire cumulative 
probability distribution of net benefits for two of the alternatives (25-ft (8-m) levee, Relocation), 
with markers for the quartiles, a solid vertical line for the mean, and a horizontal arrow 
Figure A1. Expected value and probabilist ic values for net benefits 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 13 

[[PAGE 16]]
 
    
   
  
      
   
   
 
       
   
      
 
   
   
  
    
   
    
   
     
 
    
      
     
noting the probability that Net Benefit is greater than zero.  Notice the inter-quartile range (the 
horizontal distance between the 0.75 and 0.25 quartile) is wider for the 25-ft (8-m) levee 
alternative than for the Relocation alternative. This difference demonstrates the greater 
uncertainty in the net benefits.  Table A1 and Table A2 show greater uncertainty in both the 
damage reduced and the cost of the 25-ft (8-m) levee alternative, leading to greater uncertainty in 
the net benefits. 
A-4. Figure A2 contains the same probabilistic information for the B/C ratio as Figure A1 
displays for the net benefits.  For actual reporting purposes, each graph should be labeled to 
include the name of the alternative plan (not shown here and subsequent figures). 
Figure A2. Expected value and probabilistic values for B/C ratios 
A-5. The Relocation alternative has the highest mean net benefit, closely followed by the 25-
foot (8-m) levee alternative.  The range of benefits and costs associated with the Relocation 
alternative is also substantially smaller than the range seen with the 25-ft (8-m) levee alternative 
as seen in the standard deviation and the inter-quartile range (difference between 75 and 25 
percent quartiles).  Also, the Relocation alternative has the largest probability of net benefits 
being greater than zero (or, B/C ratio being greater than one.) Further note that the mean is not 
equal to the 50 percent quartile (the median), which a result of the distribution not being 
symmetrical. 
A-6. Benefits divided by costs produce B/C ratios.  From this, the probability of maintaining a 
B/C ratio greater than one is of interest. This example shows that the Relocation alternative has 
a probability of 97 percent of the B/C ratio being greater than one, while the probability of the 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 14 

[[PAGE 17]]
 
     
    
 
       
    
        
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
     
     
     
     
     
      
     
        
       
    
   
     
25-ft (8-m) levee alternative has a probability of 87 percent of the B/C ratio being greater than 
one.  At this point only economic justification has been determined.  
A-7. Table A3 and Table A4 present the expected or mean AEP and LTEPs computed for each 
alternative.  The LTEP is the likelihood of exceedance at least once in the specified period and is 
computed as 1 - (1 - AEP)N, where N = number of years.  Table A3 shows the LTEPs in the 
standard manner, and Table A4 displays LTEP in terms of return periods and odds. 
Table A3 
Performance described by AEP and LTEP 
Alternative 
Mean 
AEP 
LTEP 
(Probability of Exceedance Over 
Indicated Time) 
10 Years 30 Years 50 Years 
Without 0.250 0.94 1.00 1.00 
20-ft (6-m) levee 0.020 0.18 0.45 0.64 
25-ft (8-m) levee 0.010 0.10 0.26 0.39 
30-ft (9-m) levee 0.001 0.01 0.03 0.05 
Channel 0.025 0.22 0.53 0.72 
Detention basin 0.030 0.26 0.60 0.78 
Relocation 0.020 0.18 0.45 0.64 
Table A4 
Performance described by AEP and LTEP (alternative display) 
Alternative 
Mean 
AEP 
LTEP 
(Probability of Exceedance Over 
Indicated Time) 
10 Years 30 Years 50 Years 
Without 0.250 1 in 1.1 1 in 1.0 1 in 1.0 
20-ft (6-m) levee 0.020 1 in 5.5 1 in 2.2 1 in 1.6 
25-ft (8-m) levee 0.010 1 in 10.5 1 in 3.8 1 in 2.5 
30-ft (9-m) levee 0.001 1 in 100.5 1 in 33.8 1 in 20.5 
Channel 0.025 1 in 4.5 1 in 1.9 1 in 1.4 
Detention basin 0.030 1 in 3.8 1 in 1.7 1 in 1.3 
Relocation 0.020 1 in 5.5 1 in 2.2 1 in 1.6 
A-8. AEP and LTEP are useful tools to explain the residual probability of flooding for an 
alternative.  AEP can represent the probability of any event equaling or exceeding a specified 
stage in any given year.  With levees present, the stage would be the top of levee or effective top 
of levee as specified by the geotechnical fragility curves; therefore, AEP represents the 
probability of water getting into the interior area of the levee in any given year.  In the software 
HEC-FDA (Reference 4i), for non-leveed reaches the target stage is determined by the 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 15 

[[PAGE 18]]
 
    
  
     
  
    
    
   
  
   
 
   
    
 
  
  
    
 
  
exceedance of a percentage of the mean damage associated with a specified event (e.g., the 1 
percent AEP event). The without-project and the relocation project have different AEP values 
although the hydrology and hydraulics remain the same.  LTEP is a way of describing the 
probability of flooding over a long period of time, for instance, the project’s lifecycle or the life 
of a typical mortgage. As Tables A -3 and A-4 show, percentages or odds can be used to describe 
the chance of flooding.  As shown in Tables A-3 and A-4, the 30-ft (9-m) levee alternative has 
the lowest AEP and LTEP of 1 in 20.5 over 50 years.  
A-9. Figure A3 presents the resultant probability (uncertainty) distribution of the AEP, described 
by the mean value, the standard deviation, and the quartile values.  The standard deviation 
describes the width of the probability distribution.  The quartiles are the values of the probability 
distribution with cumulative probabilities of 25, 50, and 75 percent—meaning there is the 
specified likelihood that the value will actually be greater than the quartile, so these values 
Figure A3. AEP uncertainty 
describe both the width and the asymmetry of the probability distribution.  There is a 50 percent 
chance that the actual value of damage reduced is between the 0.25 and 0.75 quartiles, while the 
0.5 quartile is the median estimate, meaning there is a 50 percent chance the actual value is 
greater, and 50 percent chance it is less.  The median differs from the mean when the probability 
distribution is asymmetrical. 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 16 

[[PAGE 19]]
 
     
   
    
       
    
    
     
     
   
     
   
  
      
     
 
     
  
   
 
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
     
  
     
  
  
 
  
A-10. As with any risk assessment, not only is the mean of an uncertainty distribution important, 
the entire probability distribution for the metric should be considered and compared.  A 
comparison of the mean AEP for each alternative and the 50 percent quartile, or a look at all 
three quartiles, makes it apparent that the distributions of AEP may not be symmetrical.  Figure 
A3 displays the entire cumulative probability distribution of AEP for two of the alternatives (25-
ft (8-m) levee, Relocation), with markers for the quartiles and a dotted vertical line for the mean. 
The plots in Figure A3 provide information that summarizes the uncertainty.  For example, the 
25-ft (8-m) levee alternative clearly offers higher performance when considering the mean AEP 
and the three quartiles, but it also has a longer “tail” so it has a greater chance that the AEP could 
be much higher.  The Relocation alternative has a shorter tail, and so has less chance that AEP 
could be much higher.  Another way to understand the uncertainty is if considering the likelihood 
the AEP is actually greater than 2 percent, for the 25-ft (8-m) levee alternative, the chance is 22 
percent, and for the Relocation alternative, the chance is 55 percent that AEP is greater than 2 
percent. 
A-11. Table A5 presents the mean AEPs for each alternative along with AEPs of other possible 
natural disasters in the area of interest.  Evaluating risk associated with an area can be hard 
unless compared to events that people can more readily understand.  
Table A5 
Probability comparison 
Alternative AEP 
Without 0.250 
20-ft (6-m) levee 0.020 
25-ft (8-m) levee 0.010 
30-ft (9-m) levee 0.001 
Channel 0.025 
Detention basin 0.030 
Relocation 0.020 
Comparable Probability 
Fire Damage 0.0031 
Wind Damage 0.0052 
Earthquake 0.0012 
1Average 2002–2010 based on home structure fires National Fire Protection Association and U.S. Census housing unit data. 
2Annual probabilities for other hazards are region specific. Values provided here are for illustrative purposes only. 
A-12. Figure A4 contains the Assurance (also CNP) levels, for each alternative for various 
exceedance probabilities. These values describe the estimated likelihood that the project can 
prevent damage at the specified exceedance probability.  The Assurance is based on the 
uncertainty in the actual flow and stage associated with a given exceedance probability event, as 
well as the geotechnical performance of the project. 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 17 

[[PAGE 20]]
 
    
 
 
 
        
   
    
     
   
    
     
    
      
        
  
   
   
Figure A4. Assurance (also CNP) 
A-13. To capture Assurance (also CNP), the upper graphic in Figure A4 shows the uncertainty in 
the stage versus frequency (exceedance probability) relationship. That probability (uncertainty) 
distribution is then compared to the target stages associated with each alternative to provide 
Assurance (also CNP).  The lower graphic in Figure A4 shows the probability (uncertainty) 
distribution of stage for the 1 percent chance event and compares it to the top of levee stage for 
the 30-ft (9-m) levee alternative. The area under the Probability Density Function) curve is 
summed to determine the probability of not exceeding the target stage (i.e., the non-exceedance 
probability, conditioned on the occurrence of the 1 percent event). 
A-14. Table A6 presents life loss estimates for each alternative of the study area.  A quantitative 
assessment of life loss will be required for risk assessment associated with alternatives. To 
completely discuss the transference and transformations of risk, the changes in life loss 
associated with all frequency events for each alternative must be discussed.  Although there may 
be significant decreases in economic losses and life risks for the lower frequency events, there 
may be significant increases for the same alternatives at the higher frequency events. The 
probability of flood occurrence times the consequence yields the overall risk reduction, 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 18 

[[PAGE 21]]
 
     
      
    
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
      
      
      
     
      
     
 
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
      
 
       
  
     
 
 
    
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
transformation, and transfer that are going on within the system. A narrative scenario for events 
that result in flooding will also be provided, and an example is provided in Figure A5. 
Table A6 
Life loss 
Alternative 
Expected 
Life Loss 
Probable Life Loss for a Given Event 
100 
Years 
250 
Years 
500 
Years 
Without 3.700 5.300 8.900 22.000 
20-ft (6-m) levee 1.400 6.000 10.500 28.000 
25-ft (8-m) levee 1.000 8.500 12.300 33.000 
30-ft (9-m) levee 0.850 0.300 14.000 56.000 
Channel 2.500 4.300 7.100 18.000 
Detention basin 1.500 3.100 4.100 13.000 
Relocation 0.010 0.250 0.850 1.200 
Should the levees surrounding My City south of the Your River be loaded by floodwaters, residents 
could attempt to move to nearby higher ground.  The depth of flooding in the neighborhoods in this 
area would generally not exceed that at the river's edge although a few areas would experience 
flooding of more than 10 feet. New Town, on the other hand, is ringed by levees so that residents 
trying to leave the area would have to find their way across the main highway system to areas of higher 
ground.  Limited routes of egress would make this difficult and thus negatively impacting life safety. 
Moreover, because New Town is in a depression, a third of the area would flood to depths over 10 feet. 
Some areas would flood to as much as 35 feet. Because of the lengthy duration of flooding and the 
lack of natural drainage from this area, flood water would likely remain in New Town for 2 weeks or 
more. With the proposed levee, New Town is subject to a 1 in 100 chance of being flooded in any year 
but a 1 in 2.5 chance in 50 years.  Therefore, the probability of a catastrophic event within the lifetime 
of most residents is nearly the same as flipping a coin and getting heads.  An emergency action plan 
(EAP) has been developed for the communities including response training exercises.  Additionally, 
the low areas contain many acres of environmentally valuable wetlands that would be severely 
damaged from high velocities generated from a levee failure.  Resiliency measures could be 
considered for each of these communities. These measures address the ability to avoid, minimize, 
withstand, and recover from the adverse effects of a flood.  For example, both communities have 
developed and implemented EAPs including response training exercises.  An EAP speaks to the 
ability to avoid or minimize damage to structural inventories or reduce the population at risk. 
Resiliency measures for a levee can be provided by adding superiority increments to the levee in 
higher hazard areas and surface hardening in planned levee overtopping reaches adjacent to low 
hazard areas.  Resiliency provides a higher degree of predictability for levee performance that can be 
useful for floodplain managers and project operators. 
SOURCE: Adapted from: National Research Council. 1995. Flood Risk Management and the American River Basin: An 
Evaluation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
Figure A5. Example scenario 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 19 

[[PAGE 22]]
 
    
 
  
     
 
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
   
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Glossary 
Abbreviations and Terms 
To describe effectively the concepts of a risk framework for flood risk management studies, this 
Engineer Regulation uses the following terminology: 
AEP Annual Exceedance Probability 
B/C Benefit/Cost 
CNP Conditional Non-Exceedance Probability 
EAD Expected Annual Damage 
EAP Emergency Action Plan 
EC Engineer Circular 
EM Engineer Manual 
EP Engineer Pamphlet 
ER Engineer Regulation 
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency 
HEC-FDA (used in reference h. on page 1) 
HQUSACEU.S. Army Corps of Engineers Headquarters 
LOP Level of Protection 
LTEP Long-Term Exceedance Probability 
NED National Economic Development 
PAR Population at Risk 
PMP Project Management Plan 
SPF Standard Project Flood 
USACE U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 20 

[[PAGE 23]]
 
     
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
   
   
 
     
   
  
 
   
    
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
     
  
    
  
 
Definitions 
Annual Exceedance Probability (AEP) 
The probability that a certain threshold may be exceeded at a location in any given year, 
considering the full range of possible values, and if appropriate, incorporation of project 
performance.  A threshold consists of a metric and a value, and must be specified for each use of 
AEP.  If system performance is considered, then performance should be explicitly accounted for 
in the description of AEP; similarly, if system performance is not considered then it can be 
omitted in the description of AEP.  Examples of threshold metrics include the stage, flow, surge, 
and floodplain or flooding extent, and corresponding values may be stated in feet, cfs, depth, etc. 
Examples of locations include a consequence area index point, a specific grid cell, or a fragility 
curve location (also referred to as system response probabilities).  An example statement of AEP 
without performance is: “The boundary of the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA) 100-year floodplain has a 1 percent AEP, and the entire FEMA 100-year floodplain 
corresponds to the aerial flooding extent where flood depths are greater than 0 feet.” An 
example of AEP with performance is: “The resultant AEP with a depth greater than 0 feet at 
location XX is 1% while taking into account levee performance.” 
Assurance 
The probability that a target stage will not be exceeded during the occurrence of a flood of 
specified exceedance probability considering the full range of uncertainties. Term selected to 
replace “conditional non-exceedance probability” (CNP). 
Conditional Non-Exceedance Probability (CNP) 
See Assurance. 
Consequence 
The harm that results from a single occurrence of the hazard. Consequences are measured in 
terms of metrics such as economic damage, acreage of habitat lost, value of crops damaged, and 
lives lost. 
Economic Risk 
The combination of likelihood and harm to property, infrastructure, and other assets as well as 
economic systems all measured in monetary terms. A common metric of economic risk is 
expected annual damage (EAD).  EAD is the result of integrating the damage-probability 
functions. 
Expected Annual Damage (EAD) 
EAD is the expected value of storm damages in any given year. Expected annual damage is 
calculated by computing the area under the damage-frequency curve using a lifecycle approach. 
Expected annual damage is calculated for the with- and without-project conditions. The 
difference between the with- and without-project expected annual damage represents the benefit 
associated with the with-project alternative. 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 21 

[[PAGE 24]]
 
    
 
      
     
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
     
 
  
   
   
   
 
  
  
    
    
 
  
      
   
     
  
     
 
   
    
  
    
    
 
 
 
 
       
Exposure 
Describes who and what may be harmed by the flood hazard. Exposure incorporates a 
description of where the flooding occurs at a given frequency, and what exists in that area. Tools 
such as flood inundation maps provide information on the extent and depth of flooding; structure 
inventories, population data, crop data, and habitat acreage provide information on the 
population and property that may be affected by the flood hazard. 
Hazard (flood) 
The “hazard” is what causes the harm, in this case, a flood. The flood hazard is described in 
terms of frequency, stage, velocity, extent, and depth. 
Level of Protection (LOP) 
LOP is used as a performance metric and a levee design concept that was founded on the 
principle of providing a high degree of Assurance that the levee system component would neither 
breach nor overtop when loaded with a specific recurrence interval flood (e.g., providing a 75-
year LOP if it could contain that event with 90 percent level of Assurance).  The recurrence 
interval of the flood hazard for this design principle was then used as an expression of the 
performance of the levee system.  The term is no longer used as it did not include residual risk or 
structural performance. LOP should not be used to judge a set of alternatives or to target a 
specific project size. 
Long-Term Exceedance Probability (LTEP) 
The probability of capacity exceedance during a specified period. For example, 30- year 
exceedance probability refers to the probability of one or more exceedances of the capacity of a 
measure during a 30-year period; formerly long-term risk. This accounts for the repeated annual 
exposure to flood risk over time. 
Project Performance 
The system’s reaction to a hazard. Performance refers to the system features and the capability 
to accommodate the flood hazard as a single event or load. In this manual, this would be termed 
“system performance” (also termed “engineering performance”). Performance also refers to the 
metric that describes the capability of the system to accommodate a single event (Assurance, also 
CNP) and the full range of events (AEP and LTEP). In that light, in addition to the levee failure 
probability functions, performance can also be described by the interior-exterior functions for 
leveed areas, unregulated-regulated transforms for reservoirs and diversions, and elevation-
discharge functions (rating curves) for channels. These too would be considered “ system 
performance.” When the structural integrity of a system or system component is discussed, such 
as the fragility function, the reference would be termed “structural performance.” When the 
economics of a system is discussed, the reference would be termed “economic performance.” 
The performance of an item is described by various elements, such as flood risk management, 
reliability, capability, efficiency, and maintainability.  Design and operation affect system 
performance. 
Probability Distribution 
A relationship that describes the likelihood of each possible value of a random variable. 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 22 

[[PAGE 25]]
 
     
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
  
      
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
    
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
   
Residual Risk 
The flood risk that remains in the floodplain after a proposed flood risk management project is 
implemented.  Residual risk includes the consequence of capacity exceedance as well as 
consideration of project performance. 
Resilience 
As per Executive Order 13653, “Preparing the U.S. for the Impacts of Climate Change,” 
resilience is the ability to anticipate, prepare for, and adapt to changing conditions and withstand, 
respond to, and recover rapidly from disruptions. 
Risk 
The likelihood and severity of adverse outcomes; for this ER the focus is on the risk from 
flooding.  Risk is often measured as potential or mean life loss, property damage, and/or 
ecosystem losses and may also include uncertainty over the benefits to be gained from a 
proposed or actual action taken.  Usually, both the likelihood and the consequence are to some 
degree uncertain. 
Risk Assessment 
A systematic approach for describing the nature of the risk, including the likelihood and severity 
of consequences. Risk assessments can be qualitative, semi- quantitative, or quantitative. Risk 
assessment includes explicit acknowledgment of the uncertainties in the flood risk. 
Risk Communication 
A two-way exchange of information between risk assessors and those who will use the risk 
assessment results or those who are affected by the risks and risk management actions.  Open 
communication improves the understanding of the risks by all parties and leads to improved risk 
assessments and risk management decisions and outcomes. 
Risk Framework 
A decision-making process that comprises three tasks:  risk assessment, risk management, and 
risk communication. 
Risk Management 
A decision-making process in which risk reduction actions are identified, evaluated, 
implemented, and monitored. The purpose of risk management is to take actions to effectively 
reduce and manage risks identified in the risk assessment. 
Robustness 
The ability of a system to continue to operate correctly across a wide range of operational 
conditions with minimal damage, alteration, or loss of functionality, and to fail gracefully outside 
of that range; the wider the range of conditions allowing for good performance, the more robust 
the system. 
Safety 
Thought of as the condition of being free from danger, risk, or injury.  However, safety is not 
something that can be absolutely achieved or guaranteed.  Instead, safety is the condition to 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 23 

[[PAGE 26]]
 
    
 
 
   
     
  
 
    
     
  
  
 
 
   
    
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
     
  
   
    
   
  
 
 
   
  
   
 
     
 
which risks are managed to tolerable levels.  Therefore, safety is a subjective concept based upon 
individual perceptions of risks and their tolerability. 
Superiority 
Superiority simply means providing higher levees at all points except where initial overtopping 
is desired. Superiority is an increment of the levee height that increases the likelihood that when 
the system approaches capacity, controlled flooding will occur at a specified overtopping section. 
Transferred Risk 
A result of an action taken in one region of a system to reduce risk, where that action shifts the 
risk burden to another region in the system.  For example, if a levee is raised in one reach of a 
system, thus containing more flow and thereby reducing risk in that reach, that action then results 
in increased flow downstream to another reach of the system.  Risk has been “transferred” from 
one location to another. 
Transformed Risk 
New risk of flooding that emerges or increases as a result of mitigating another risk.  The 
magnitude and nature of the risk of flooding is different with a levee compared with conditions 
without a levee.  A levee reduces the likelihood that originally protected property will be flooded 
but may set the stage for development that puts new property at risk.  A levee transforms the 
flood risk from one that may be gradual and observable before emergency action would be 
necessary for the originally protected properties to flood risk that may be sudden and 
catastrophic. 
Uncertainty 
Uncertainty is the result of imperfect knowledge concerning the present or future state of a 
system, event, situation, or (sub) population under consideration.  Uncertainty leads to lack of 
confidence in predictions, inferences, or conclusions.  It is important to distinguish uncertainty 
that results from a lack of knowledge from the uncertainty that results from natural variability. 
Knowledge Uncertainty 
Lack of knowledge regarding the true value of a quantity.  Uncertainty is a consequence of 
reliance on limited data and on conceptual and mathematical models.  This category of 
uncertainty is formally labeled epistemic uncertainty.  Uncertainty is a measure of imprecision of 
knowledge of parameters and functions used to describe the hydraulic, hydrologic, geotechnical, 
and economic aspects of a project plan. 
Natural Variability 
The distribution or spread of values within a natural “population” or data set.  This array of 
possible values in a population is caused by the inherent randomness of natural or social systems 
and is formally labeled aleatory uncertainty.  The values in the statistical population have some 
probability distribution, and only limited knowledge of the entire statistical population and the 
probability distribution may exist.  Sometimes variability is classed as a type of uncertainty 
although generally it should not be confused or interchanged with uncertainty as defined above.  
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 24 

[[PAGE 27]]
 
     
     
 
 
 
  
 
Variability is the notion that there is a range of possible values that will occur and not the lack of 
knowledge about that range or the distribution of those values. 
Vulnerability 
The susceptibility of harm to human beings, property, and the environment when exposed to a 
hazard.  Depth-damage functions, depth-mortality functions, and other similar relationships can 
be used to describe vulnerability. 
ER 1105-2-101 ● 15 July 2019 25 