[[PAGE 1]]
Adv. Geosci., 9, 15–23, 2006
www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/
© Author(s) 2006. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons License.
Advances in
Geosciences
Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods in non-dyked
communities along the Elbe and Mulde Rivers
K.-E. Lindenschmidt1, U. Herrmann1, I. Pech1, U. Suhr2, H. Apel1, and A. Thieken1
1GFZ GeoForschungsZentrum Potsdam, Section 5.4 – Engineering Hydrology, Telegrafenberg, 14473 Potsdam, Germany
2UFZ – Centre for Environmental Research, Dept. Hydrological Modelling, Br¨uckstr. 3a, 39114 Magdeburg, Germany
Received: 23 January 2006 – Revised: 22 May 2006 – Accepted: 3 July 2006 – Published: 26 September 2006
Abstract. Assessing and mapping damage risk of ﬂoods for
large river basins is still in its infancy. Damage risk is un-
derstood to be the combination of ﬂood hazard and the vul-
nerability of communities to a ﬂood of a particular return
period. Risk is calculated and mapped for two communities
in which dykes are not located for ﬂood protection: Meissen
on the Elbe River and D ¨obeln in the Mulde catchment. Dif-
ferent methodologies for the computation of ﬂood depth and
inundation extent of varying ﬂood return periods (hazard)
are compared. Exposure and relative damage to the ﬂood-
ing (vulnerability) based on land-use coverages of different
scale are also compared and discussed. A property asset cov-
erage completes the data requirements for the construction of
the risk maps. Recommendations for continued research on
risk assessments of large river basins conclude the study.
1 Introduction
An important prerequisite for developing provision manage-
ment concepts for the mitigation of damages from extreme
ﬂood events is to identify areas of potentially high risk to
such events (Lindenschmidt et al., 2005). In this context, risk
is deﬁned as the probability that a given loss will occur. Thus,
risk encompasses both, hazard and vulnerability. For a quan-
titative risk analysis several events that cover a broad range
of event probabilities should be investigated. Typical out-
comes of a risk assessment are the expected annual damage
or a more detailed risk curve that shows the exceedance prob-
abilities and corresponding losses for different events (e.g.
Merz and Thieken, 2004). Risk maps are extremely useful,
however methodologies for very large river basins are still
rare. Kron and Willems (2002) identify eight independent
regional loss accumulation zones in Germany in which prob-
Correspondence to: K.-E. Lindenschmidt
(kel@gfz-potsdam.de)
able maximum losses are calculated for ﬁve different ﬂood
scenarios corresponding to return periods ranging from 10 to
200 years. Zoning is carried out, not of rivers alone, but of
entire large catchment areas. The system has been used by a
reinsurance company. Similar efforts for Germany have been
carried out by Kleeberg (2001), who concentrated the zoning
to the ﬂood regions along rivers and who implemented the
method in the software package Z ¨URS (Zoning System for
Floods, Backwater and Heavy Rains) that has been used by
insurance companies. In the UK, Rodda and Berger (2002)
established differentiated risk zones in the ﬂooded areas near
the river itself, and Hall et al. (2003) and Sayers et al. (2002)
have extended this approach to include the probabilities of
dyke failures. The implementation of dyke fragility curves
has also found application in the USA (USACE, 1996, 1999).
These methods provide a rough orientation of where “hot
spots” occur in terms of ﬂood risk on very large (nationwide)
scales. These have their justiﬁcation for high-level strate-
gic planning for entire countries and provide information on
a scale that is valuable for re-insurance companies, which
base their policies on probable maximum loss estimates. The
downside of these methods is that the spatial resolution is
generally too coarse and the results not differentiated enough
to be applicable for the development of mitigation concepts.
Additional efforts in quantifying risk at higher resolutions
have been documented in an atlas for the River Rhine be-
tween Lake Constance and Rotterdam (ICPR, 2001). Flood
hazard is deﬁned in categories of ﬂood depth (0–1
2 m, 1
2–2 m,
2–4 m, >4 m) and the number of persons at risk. Vulnerabil-
ity is deﬁned in ﬁve categories of possible damages due to
extreme ﬂoods or dyke failures (in settlements less or greater
than 50 EUR/m2; in regions of industry, trade, infrastruc-
ture and transport less or greater than 25 EUR/m 2; agricul-
tural land surfaces less than 1 EUR/m 2) and is based on the
CORINE land-use classiﬁcation. The aim of the atlas was to
draw the attention of citizens at risk along the Rhine and to
provide a basis for the Rhine Action Plan with the mandate
Published by Copernicus GmbH on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.

[[PAGE 2]]
16 K.-E. Lindenschmidt et al.: Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods
 
 
Figure 1: Risk map are presented for the co mmunities of Meissen on the Elbe River and 
Döbeln in the Mulde catchment. Red triangles represent stream gauges. 
 13
Fig. 1. Risk map are presented for the communities of Meissen on
the Elbe River and D ¨obeln in the Mulde catchment. Red triangles
represent stream gauges.
of providing better protection of humans and material assets
against ﬂooding and improve the ecological state of the river
and its ﬂoodplains. Only the extent of ﬂoods with return pe-
riods of 10 and 100 years and an extreme ﬂood were consid-
ered. Risk calculations were not carried out.
Similar efforts were carried out for large rivers in Sax-
ony and documented in an atlas (LfUG, 2005). Flood in-
tensity is deﬁned both as ﬂood depth (same categories as
Rhine atlas) and speciﬁc discharge (ﬂow velocity × ﬂood
depth: 0– 1
2 m2/s, 1
2–2 m2/s, >2 m2/s), which is similar to the
ﬂood hazard speciﬁcation developed in Switzerland (BWW,
1997; BWG, 2001). Vulnerability calculations are based
on ATKIS land-use data and categorised into industrial (two
classes: one less and the other greater than 10 EUR/m2), set-
tlement ( <10 EUR/m2, 10–50 EUR/m2, >50 EUR/m2) and
agricultural and forestry regions (1 EUR/m 2). Risk calcula-
tions were not carried out however, points of high risk such
as electrical generators and transformers, water supply fa-
cilities, industries with high damage potential, hospitals and
wastewater treatment plants are indicated.
In this study a similar methodology is pursued as that used
for the Rhine atlas, with the addition of risk assessment for
the city of Meissen on the Elbe River and the city of D ¨obeln
in the Mulde catchment. The river sections at these commu-
nities are of different Strahler stream order and were chosen
to assess scale differences on risk assessment. The scale dif-
ference is due to the difference in stream order of the com-
munities investigated. The hazard × vulnerability approach
is used for risk calculations and mapping for several ﬂood
events of varying return periods. Different methods are de-
scribed and compared for the computation of ﬂood depths
and inundation extent for the construction of hazard maps.
Vulnerability mapping based on land-use coverages of differ-
ent resolution is compared. The implications of using land-
use data of different scale on the subsequent risk calculations
and mapping are discussed. Conclusions of the risk assess-
ment and an outlook for future research close the paper.
2 Study areas
Risk maps are presented from two cities: Meissen on the
Elbe River (Elbe-km ≈ 82) and D ¨obeln on the Freiberger
Mulde (F.Mulde-km ≈ 24), a tributary of the Mulde River
(see Fig. 1). Both areas are situated in incised valleys and
dykes for ﬂood protection are not present in their vicini-
ties. The Strahler order of the Elbe at Meissen and of the
Freiberger Mulde at D ¨obeln are 6 and 4, respectively. Dis-
charge characteristics of the ﬁrst gage upstream and the ﬁrst
gage downstream from the study sites are given in Table 1.
All areas were heavily affected by the August 2002 ﬂood.
3 Damage risk assessment
Risk is deﬁned as the probability of the adverse effects of
a natural process such as a ﬂood exceeding a certain magni-
tude (intensity) from which certain damages and losses occur
(vulnerability) (Merz et al., 2006).
In damage risk assessment, hazard must ﬁrst be deter-
mined, which incorporates a frequency analysis of the inten-
sity of the threatening occurrence (see Fig. 2). In our case,
the occurrence is a ﬂood event and the intensity of the event
is measured by the depth and extent of the ﬂooding. Damage
occurs through ﬂooding and increases with the intensity of
the event. This is the basis for vulnerability. The vulnerabil-
ity curve reaches an asymptote at high degrees of intensity
since a point of maximum damage corresponding to the to-
tal assets in the ﬂooded area can theoretically be attained.
(An asymptote can theoretically be attained for hazard, espe-
cially in large river basins, in which the ﬂood magnitude ap-
proaches an upper limit called the probable maximum ﬂood.
However, this limit is not as easily deﬁned as for vulnerabil-
ity). Transferring damage costs to a probability of the dam-
ages being attained or exceeded forms the risk curve. The
area under this curve is the damage expectation for the stud-
ied area.
To aid risk assessment risk can also be mapped for ar-
eas of ﬂooding. The probability of exceedance (expressed
Adv. Geosci., 9, 15–23, 2006 www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/

[[PAGE 3]]
K.-E. Lindenschmidt et al.: Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods 17
Table 1. Discharge characteristics of the gages immediately upstream and downstream from the study sites (see also Fig. 1).
Gage Elbe-km1 F.Mulde-km2 MQ3 MHQ4 HHQ5
Date of HQ Series
Elbe
Dresden 55,6 - 327 1460 4580 16-Aug-2002 1931 to 2003
Torgau 154,2 - 344 1420 4420 17-Aug-2002 1936 to 2003
Freiberger Mulde
Nossen - 47,2 6,81 68,7 690 12-Aug-2002 1926 to 2003
Erlln - 1,5 35 300 6106 08-Dec-19706
1961 to 2003
1 km ascending in flow direction 3 mean discharge 5 highest discharge recorded
2 km descending in flow direction 4 mean annual peak discharge 6 no recording of Aug-2002 flood  
also as a return period = 1/exceedance probability) together
with the intensity of the event (usually expressed in terms of
ﬂood depth or inundation) establishes the hazard induced by
the ﬂood event (see Fig. 3). Using land-use information and
damage costs as functions of water depth and perhaps other
factors (i.e. ﬂow velocities) the vulnerability of certain land-
use types that are exposed to the ﬂood and their susceptibility
to damage by the ﬂooding can be assessed. Both hazard and
vulnerability are combined to calculate risk and can be used
to establish risk maps. Once areas of exceptionally high risk
(“hot spots”) have been identiﬁed scenarios can be run to test
various management concepts for ﬂood mitigation.
4 Risk mapping at Meissen (Elbe River)
Different methodologies were used to construct risk maps for
the communities on the Elbe and Mulde Rivers, depending
on the data and tools available. The steps taken to construct
the risk maps at Meissen on the Elbe River are as follows
(see also Fig. 4):
1. A ﬂood frequency analysis of the maximum annual
ﬂood peaks was carried out for all the discharge gages
along the upper German Elbe River. These include the
gages at Schmilka, Dresden, Meissen, Torgau and Wit-
tenberg. The return periods were estimated on the ba-
sis of annual maximum discharge series and the gener-
alised extreme value (GEV) distribution estimated using
L-moments.
2. Using the hydraulic model QSIM the water levels along
the Elbe between Schmilka and Wittenberg were sim-
ulated every 500 m along the river stretch. QSIM
(Quality Simulation) is a water quality model devel-
oped by the Federal Institute of Hydrology, Germany
(Kirchesch and Sch ¨ol, 1999) with a focus on navigable
rivers to analyse the environmental impacts of river con-
trol measures and constructions on the rivers’ aquatic
ecosystems. The hydraulic module uses the Kalinin-
Miljukov technique to route ﬂow hydrographs and to
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Graphical representations of hazard and vulnerability in  the computation of damage 
flood risk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Flood risk as interaction of hazard and vulnerability (adapted from Merz and 
Thieken, 2004). 
 14
Fig. 2. Graphical representations of hazard and vulnerability in the
computation of damage ﬂood risk.
subsequently calculate water levels, details of which are
given in Plate et al. (1977) and Patt et al. (2001).
3. Using the Watershed Modelling System (WMS) ( http:
//www.ems-i.com) the ﬂood depths and extent were cal-
culated based on digital elevation maps with a point res-
olution every 5 m for the river corridor and every 25 m
for the hinterland. WMS is a comprehensive graphical
modelling environment for all phases of watershed hy-
drology and hydraulics and includes tools to automate
modelling processes such as basin delineation, geomet-
ric parameter calculations, GIS overlay computations
and ﬂoodplain delineation and mapping.
4. Exposition is calculated by overlaying the hazard map
with either the ATKIS or CORINE digital land-use
map. All mapping was carried out using ArcGIS ( http:
//www.esri.com/). ATKIS (Amtliches Topographisches
Informationssystem) (http://www.atkis.de/) is a service
by the German survey administration providing digital
www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/ Adv. Geosci., 9, 15– 23, 2006

[[PAGE 4]]
18 K.-E. Lindenschmidt et al.: Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Graphical representations of hazard and vulnerability in  the computation of damage 
flood risk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Flood risk as interaction of hazard and vulnerability (adapted from Merz and 
Thieken, 2004). 
 14
Fig. 3. Flood risk as interaction of hazard and vulnerability (adapted from Merz and Thieken, 2004).
 
 
 
Figure 4: Methodology in mapping h azard, vulnerability and risk for the city of Meissen on 
the Elbe River. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Methodology in mapping hazard, vulnerability and risk for the city of Döbeln on the 
Freiberger Mulde River. 
 15
Fig. 4. Methodology in mapping hazard, vulnerability and risk for
the city of Meissen on the Elbe River.
land-use, elevation and topography maps. The land-
use map with the ﬁnest resolution (1:25 000) was used.
The CORINE Land Cover project ( http://www.corine.
dfd.dlr.de) provides area-wide land use (from the years
1990 and 2000) and land-use change maps based on re-
mote sensing data. Its scale is 1:100 000.
5. Relative damage functions for the land-use types of in-
terest were used to map vulnerability. Examples of
damage functions in which the percentage of damage
degree y is a function of ﬂood depth x are:
ATKIS land cover (MURL, 2000;
http://www.proaqua-gmbh.de/hws/hwsnrw/hws/)
y = 27√ x(industry&services)
y = a ·x + b√ x
1.95583 (residential)
where a and b are coefﬁcients depending if a basement
is present or not.
CORINE land cover (http://www.rheinatlas.de/H)
y = 2x2 + 2x(residential, real estate)
y = 11.4x + 12.625(residential, household contents)
6. The vulnerability map from the previous step and a
property asset value map (Kleist et al., 2004; Thieken
et al., 2006) are overlain to map risk for the ﬂood of
a particular return period. The asset map contains es-
timates of the asset values of residential buildings for
each community in Germany on the basis of census data
on the number of buildings per community provided
by INFAS Geodaten GmbH, census data on the ﬂoor
area in residential buildings per district provided by the
Federal Statistical Ofﬁce in Germany and standardised
reconstruction costs per square meter published by the
Ministry of Transport, Construction and Housing. The
algorithm is outlined in Kleist et al. (2004). Thieken
et al. (2006) show how the asset estimates per commu-
nity can be disaggregated to CORINE land-use classes
by the use of a disaggregation scheme (dasymetric map-
ping). Assets from industrial areas are not mapped and
were assumed to be 20% less than those of residential
assets. This proportion was applied by LfUG (2005) for
the construction of their vulnerability maps.
Adv. Geosci., 9, 15–23, 2006 www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/

[[PAGE 5]]
K.-E. Lindenschmidt et al.: Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods 19
5 Risk mapping at D ¨obeln (Mulde River)
Steps in constructing risk maps for D¨obeln on the Freiberger
Mulde River are (see also Fig. 5):
1. A ﬂood frequency analysis was carried out using self-
programmed MatLab routines as described in Apel et
al. (2004). There is no discharge gage at D ¨obeln, hence
data from the next upstream gage at Nossen was taken
for the analysis. The series of annual maximum dis-
charges for 76 continuous years from 1925 to 2003 was
available to which the general extreme value probability
distribution estimated using L-moments gave the best
ﬁt. The ﬁt provided the discharges for ﬂood return peri-
ods of 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500 and 1000 years, which
were used as input for the subsequent hydraulic simula-
tions.
2. The LISFLOOD-FP program (Bates and De Roo, 2000)
was used to simulate ﬂood depths and inundation ex-
tents. The program is a raster ﬂood inundation model
for simulating ﬂood spreading, with output consisting
of raster maps of water depth in each grid square at
each time step and predicted stage and discharge hydro-
graphs at the outlet of the reach. The kinematic approx-
imation to the one-dimensional St. Venant equations is
used to simulate the passage of a ﬂood wave along a
channel reach. Two dimensional ﬂood spreading using
the diffusion wave analogy of the St. Venant equations
and storage cells applied over a raster grid simulates
water movement from the channel to adjacent ﬂood-
plains. The spatial resolution in our inundation sim-
ulations is 25 m. The synthetic ﬂood waves were de-
rived via characteristic normalized ﬂood waves of the
river extracted by a cluster analysis of the recorded an-
nual maximum ﬂood waves (see Apel et al., 2004). The
mean daily ﬂood peak discharges for the single return
periods drawn from the GEV were further scaled to sub-
daily ﬂash ﬂood discharges based on a regression rela-
tion between mean daily ﬂood peak discharges and the
actual recorded peak discharges of the event.
3. The mapping of hazard and vulnerability and the subse-
quent calculations and mapping of risk follow the same
procedure already described above in Steps iv) to vi) for
Meissen on the Elbe River.
6 Conclusions
Results and discussion
6.1 Risk mapping of Meissen (Elbe) for HQ 100
The ﬂood extent for the ﬂood of return period 100 years in
the city of Meissen is given in Fig. 6a. At some points, the
 
 
 
Figure 4: Methodology in mapping h azard, vulnerability and risk for the city of Meissen on 
the Elbe River. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Methodology in mapping hazard, vulnerability and risk for the city of Döbeln on the 
Freiberger Mulde River. 
 15
Fig. 5. Methodology in mapping hazard, vulnerability and risk for
the city of D¨obeln on the Freiberger Mulde River.
width of the ﬂood extends over 1000 m across the river. This
map is used as the hazard layer for risk constructs based
on both ATKIS and CORINE land covers. Four classiﬁca-
tions are present in the area with ATKIS data (Fig. 6b) of
which mostly residences are ﬂooded by the event. The max-
imum damage attained by this 100 year ﬂood is 78 EUR/m 2
for mixed usage which includes settlements) (Fig. 6c). The
study area is partitioned by only three CORINE land-use
classiﬁcations, as shown in Fig. 6d. Settlements are by far
the most ﬂooded by this event. Damage costs (see Fig. 6e)
reach nearly 160 EUR/m 2, which is twice that attained by
the ATKIS data. The high costs occur along the banks of the
river and are due to the coarse grained resolution of CORINE
data. There is an overlap at some locations between land use
near the river bank and the river geomorphology itself caus-
ing an overestimation of ﬂood depths. It is recommended
that these areas of overestimated damage are ﬁltered using
a precise overlay coverage of the river bank. The extent of
damage also covers a larger area than for the more land-use
differentiated ATKIS data. Due to the low-grain resolution of
the CORINE land cover, ﬂood damage is allocated in areas
where little damage is expected to occur.
A large uncertainty exists in the values used for the prop-
erty assets. The asset values used here from Thieken et
al. (2006) are only 40% of those values from LfUG (2005).
Hence, there is a large discrepancy in the risk calculations by
the same proportion.
6.2 Risk mapping of D ¨obeln (Mulde) for HQ100
The extent and depths of the ﬂood with a return period of
100 years are shown for D¨obeln in Fig. 7a. The river appears
branched, however, the upper diversion is the actual river
with the lower branch being a shallow ditch which ﬁlls with
water during ﬂoods. In the branched section, the width of the
www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/ Adv. Geosci., 9, 15– 23, 2006

[[PAGE 6]]
20 K.-E. Lindenschmidt et al.: Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods
 
Figure 6: Hazards, vulnerability and damage risk maps for a flood with a return period of 100 
years in the city of Meissen on the Elbe River. 
 16
Fig. 6. Hazards, vulnerability and damage risk maps for a ﬂood with a return period of 100 years in the city of Meissen on the Elbe River.
Adv. Geosci., 9, 15–23, 2006 www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/

[[PAGE 7]]
K.-E. Lindenschmidt et al.: Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods 21
 
Figure 7: Hazards, vulnerability and damage risk  maps for the flood with a return period of 
100 years in the city of Döbeln in the Mulde catchment. 
 
 17
Fig. 7. Hazards, vulnerability and damage risk maps for the ﬂood with a return period of 100 years in the city of D ¨obeln in the Mulde
catchment.
ﬂooding extends 600 m across the river. The water course ap-
pears only in the ATKIS land-use coverage (see Fig. 7b), not
in the CORINE database (see Fig. 7d), due to the small scale
of the river in this area. The former land-use map contains
some forested areas that are ﬂooded on the right river bank
in the top left corner of Fig. 7b. These areas are classiﬁed
with very little relative ﬂood susceptibility and no risk is as-
signed to them in the risk maps in Fig. 7c. The forested area
is too small for it to be registered as such in the CORINE
land-use map in Fig. 7d. The area affected by the ﬂooding is
www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/ Adv. Geosci., 9, 15– 23, 2006

[[PAGE 8]]
22 K.-E. Lindenschmidt et al.: Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods
almost all urban, even those designated as forested in ATKIS.
Hence, the extent of damages in Fig. 7e is far greater than it
should be. Damage costs are not as high as those for Meis-
sen and are comparable for the two land-use databases. As
was the case for Meissen, damages along the river bank are
overestimated using the CORINE coverage due to the miss-
ing water course. Filtering out these high risk values is again
advised using a precise overlay map of the river.
7 Conclusions
– As may have been expected, the more ﬁne-grained res-
olution of the ATKIS land cover provides more accurate
ﬂood risk assessments than do the CORINE land cover
data. Damage costs and the extent of ﬂood damages are
expected to be overestimated when using CORINE data.
When using CORINE data, it is recommended that the
extreme risk values along the river banks are ﬁltered out
using an overlay of an accurate designation of the river
course.
– Two methods for constructing hazard maps were exhib-
ited: i) using a hydraulic model to simulate the water
levels and delineating the water levels on a digital el-
evation map to obtain ﬂood depths and extent, and ii)
using a hydraulic model which incorporates the ﬂood-
plain in its simulations. It is recommended to use the
latter method since work steps are reduced for the ﬂood
delineation for the hydraulic/ﬂoodplain model which di-
rectly provides the ﬂood depths and extent as simulation
output.
– Although the risk assessment of the two studied areas
are from rivers of different Strahler order (6 for Meis-
sen and 4 for D¨obeln) scale effects can not be observed.
This may be due to the limited number of areas investi-
gated.
8 Outlook for future research
For future work, we wish to compare risk outcomes between
water levels interpolated between actual gage measurements
and those computed from model simulations. This com-
parison may give an orientation on the magnitude of the
uncertainty within hazard calculations and its propagation
in risk calculations. If the data is available, a comparison
with actual ﬂow and inundation depths and extent would
surely provide useful information on the uncertainties. The
question as to how much hazard and vulnerability contribute
to the overall uncertainty in risk assessments for varying
extreme discharges still remains unanswered. The analysis
should also be carried out on river reaches with dykes. Risk
assessments of additional communities along the rivers will
also be carried out in order to determine if patterns due to
scaling effects arise. A comparison with an analysis of the
August 2002 ﬂood is also to be carried out.
Edited by: R. Barthel, J. G ¨otzinger, G. Hartmann, J. Jagelke,
V . Rojanschi, and J. Wolf
Reviewed by: anonymous referees
References
Apel, H., Thieken, A. H., Merz, B., and Bl ¨oschl, G.: Flood risk
assessment and associated uncertainty, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst.
Sci., 4, 295–308, 2004,
http://www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/4/295/2004/.
Bates, P. D. and De Roo, A. P. J.: A simple raster-based model for
ﬂoodplain inundation., J. Hydrol., 236, 54–77, 2000.
BWG: Hochwasserschutz an Fließgew ¨assern – Wegleitungen des
BWG (Flood protection at lotic waters – a guide from the
Federal Institute of Water and Geology), Schweizer Bunde-
sanstalt f ¨ur Wasser und Geologie, http://www.bwg.admin.ch/
service/katalog/download/804801d.pdf, 2001.
BWW: Ber ¨ucksichtigung der Hochwassergefahren bei raumwirk-
samen T ¨atigkeiten (Flood hazard in consideration of spatial
activities), Schweizer Bundesanstalt f ¨ur Wasserwirtschaft,
http://www.bwg.admin.ch/service/katalog/download/pdf/
804201d.pdf, 1997.
Hall, J. W., Dawson, R. J., Sayers, P. B., Rosu, C., Chatterton, J.
B., and Deakin, R.: A methodology for nation-scale ﬂood risk
assessment, Water Mar. Eng., 156(WM3), 235–247, 2003.
ICPR: Rhine-Atlas. International Commission for the Protection of
the Rhine., http://www.rheinatlas.de, 2001.
Kirchesch, V . and Sch ¨ol, A.: Das Gew ¨asserg¨utemodell QSIM –
Ein Instrument zur Simulation und Prognose des Stoffhaushalts
und der Planktondynamik von Fließgew ¨assern (The water qual-
ity model QSIM – an instrument for the simulation and forecast
of the substance regime and plankton dynamics in rivers), Bun-
desanstalt f¨ur Gew¨asserkunde, Koblenz, Germany, 1999.
Kleeberg, H.-B.: Zur Hochwasser-Risikozonierung der deutschen
Versicherungwirtschaft (On ﬂood zoning for the German in-
surance industry), in: Hochwasser – Niedrigwasser – Risiken,
N¨urnberger Wasserwirtschaftstage des ATV-DVWK Landesver-
bandes Bayern, 9–10 May 2001, pp. 39–50, 2001.
Kleist, L., Thieken, A., K ¨ohler, P., M ¨uller, M., Seifert, I., and
Werner, U.: Estimation of building values as a basis for a com-
parative risk assessment, in: Disasters and Society - From Haz-
ard Assessment to Risk Reduction, edited by: Malzahn, D. and
Plapp, T., Logos-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 115–122, 2004.
Kron, W. and Willems, W.: Flood risk zoning and loss accumu-
lation analysis for Germany, International Conference on Flood
Estimation, 6–8 March 2002, Berne, Switzerland, pp. 549–558,
2002.
LfUG: Hochwasser in Sachsen – Gefahrenhinweisekarte (Floods
in Saxony – ﬂood impact maps). S ¨achsisches Landesamt f ¨ur
Umwelt und Geologie, Zur Wetterwarte 11, 01109 Dresden,
Abteilung1@lfug.smul.sachsen.de, 2005.
Lindenschmidt, K.-E., Fleischbein, K., Petrow, T., V orogushyn, S.,
Theobald, S., and Merz, B.: Model system and scenario devel-
opment for the provision management of extreme ﬂoods in large
river basins, Adv. Geosci., 5, 99–104, 2005,
http://www.adv-geosci.net/5/99/2005/.
Adv. Geosci., 9, 15–23, 2006 www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/

[[PAGE 9]]
K.-E. Lindenschmidt et al.: Risk assessment and mapping of extreme ﬂoods 23
Merz, B. and Thieken, A. H. Flood risk analysis: concepts and chal-
lenges, ¨Osterreichische Wasser- und Abfallwirtschaft, 56(3–4),
27–34, 2004.
Merz, B., Thieken, A. H., and Gocht, M.: Flood risk mapping at
the local scale: concepts and challenges, in: Flooding in Europe
– Challenges and development in ﬂood risk management, Ad-
vances in Natural and Technological Hazards Research, Springer,
in press, 2006.
MURL: Potentielle Hochwassersch¨aden am Rhein in NRW (Poten-
tial ﬂood damages on the Rhine River in North Rhine West-
fahlia), Ministerium f ¨ur Umwelt, Raumordnung und Land-
wirtschaft des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, 2000.
Patt, H. (Ed.): Hochwasser-Handbuch – Auswirkungen und Schutz,
(Flood Handbook – Effects and Protection), Springer Verlag,
2001.
Plate, E. J., Schultz, G. A., Seus, G. J., and Wittenberg, H.: Ablauf
von Hochwasserwellen in Gerinnen (Succession of ﬂood waves
in channels), Schriftenreihe des Kuratoriums f ¨ur Wasser und
Kulturbauwesen, Heft 27, Parey, Hamburg, 1977.
Rodda, H. and Berger, A.: The application of ﬂood modelling and
mapping for managing ﬂood risk in the UK, International Con-
ference on Flood Estimation, 6–8 March 2002, Berne, Switzer-
land, pp. 645–650, 2002.
Sayers, P., Hall, J., Dawson, R., Rosu, C., Chatterton, J., and
Deakin, R.: Risk assessment of ﬂood and coastal defences for
strategic planning (RASP) – a high level methodology, DEFRA
Conference of Coastal and River Engineering, Keele University,
July 2002.
Thieken, A. H., M ¨uller, M., Kleist, L., Seifert, I., Borst, D., and
Werner, U.: Regionalisation of asset values for risk analyses,
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 6(2), 167–178, 2006.
USACE: Engineering and design – risk-based analysis for
ﬂood damage reduction studies. Pub. # EM1110-2-1619,
US Army Corps of Engineers, Washington, D.C., 20314-
1000,http://www.usace.army.mil/inet/usace-docs/eng-manuals/
em1110-2-1619/toc.html, 1996.
USACE: Risk-based analysis in geotechnical engineering for
support of planning studies, Pub. # ETL 1110-2-556,
US Army Corps of Engineers, Washington, D.C., 20314-
1000, http://www.usace.army.mil/inet/usace-docs/eng-tech-ltrs/
etl1110-2-556/toc.html, 1999.
www.adv-geosci.net/9/15/2006/ Adv. Geosci., 9, 15– 23, 2006