[[PAGE 1]]
SOCIAL RESILIENCE TO FLOOD DISASTERS: DEMOGRAPHIC, SOCIO-
ECONOMIC AND PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS OF IMPACT 
 
Vladimir M. Cvetković123*, Tamara Ivković23 
 
1 Faculty of Security Studies, University of Belgrade, Gospodara Vuč ića 50, 11040 Belgrade, Serbia; 
vmc@fb.bg.ac.rs 
2 Scientific-Professional Society for Disaster Risk Management, Dimitrija Tucovića 121, Belgrade, Serbia 
3   International Institute for Disaster Research, Dimitrija Tucovića 121, Belgrade, Serbia. 
 
* Correspondence: vmc@fb.bg.ac.rs. 
 
Abstract: Starting from the increasingly frequent consequences of floods in local communities in Serbia, this 
paper aims to examine the level and impact of selected demographic, socio -economic and psychological factors 
on the level of social resilience to flood disasters. The research was conducted using a provided questionnaire and 
then collected online for 261 respondents during August 2021. The research results show a statistically significant 
influence of gender, previous experience, social ties, trust in public institutions and involvement in risk 
communication processes on the level of social resilience to flooding disasters.  In addition, research has found 
that strengthening social resilience requires strengthening social networking, trust and solidarity among members 
of the local community. The obtained research results can significantly help all stakeholders formulate strategies, 
plans, and initiatives to improve social resilience to the conseque nces of flood disasters and create preconditions 
for building a safe and sustainable environment. 
 
Keywords: disaster, flood, social resilience, demographic, socio-economic, psychological factors.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
The application of the concept of resilience in disaster management proves to be one of the critical aspects in the 
interpretation and management of the complexity of the natural environment and social and public infrastructure 
systems (Koliou et al., 2018). The main difficulty of flood risk management is their rapid occurrence and spatial 
distribution, which means the short time required for warning and the limited time available to minimise risk 
(Bodoque et al., 2016). Traditional flood risk management approaches have focused on flood defence to mitigate 
their consequences. However, many experiences show that structural solutions alone will not solve flood problems 
(Adedeji, Proverbs, Xiao & Oladokun, 2018; Koliou et al., 2018; O'Neill, Brereton, Shahumyan & Clinch, 2016). 
 Flood resilience has become a significant focus of flood risk management policy as reflected in a strategy that 
provides the pre conditions for maximum flood mitigation (Adedeji, Proverbs, Xiao & Oladokun, 2018). The 
emergence of a new paradigm has shifted the focus from a reactive approach to prevention, i.e., resilience building 
and non-structural measures such as risk assessments , flood warnings, awareness -raising, household readiness, 
land use planning, and emergency management (O'Neill et al.  2016). The EU Floods Directive has incorporated 
this policy shift by advocating for an approach that includes interdependent measures in f lood risk management 
plans to reduce the likelihood and consequences of floods (Nones, 2015). The way people perceive risk is essential 
for understanding people’s responses to floods and taking appropriate action to improve them (O’Neill, Brereton, 
Shahumyan & Clinch, 2016). The responsibility for taking protective measures against the consequences of floods 
is mainly attributed to the government, while the share of citizen participation is tiny.  
 It is essential to recognise that each individual has a resp onsibility to strengthen their resilience, thus helping 
to improve the strength of the community by having a clear perception of the risk, regularly informing and taking 
protection measures (Soetanto, Mullins & Achour, 2017). Resilience helps society resist, absorb and recover from 
small and large-scale disorders, i.e. both within local communities and at the level of nations (Koliou et al., 2018). 
Interest in social resilience to disasters is closely related to the need to determine measures to prevent and mitigate 
the negative consequences of shocks and disasters in local communities and at the regional and national levels 
(Saja et al., 2019). Understanding the various factors that determine the perception and behaviour of the population 
in the context of floods can contribute to the identification of groups with lower perceptions of flood risk, based 
on which appropriate strategies for improving social resilience to floods can be developed and implemented 
(Soetanto, Mullins & Achour, 2017). Identifying and devising adequate measures requires gaining insight into 
how society is resilient and which factors are vital in determining the degree of social resilience. Information on 
social resilience can help decision -makers in communities at risk of disaster when  adopting and implementing 
preventive measures (Khoja, Schubert & Joerin, 2020). A significant challenge for contemporary research is to 
formulate a unique standard of social resilience, emphasising uniformity that would allow comparing the 

[[PAGE 2]]
resilience stat us of two communities to make appropriate decisions about investing in resilience (Soetanto, 
Mullins & Achour, 2017). This paper reviews the international scientific literature to examine the factors 
influencing social resilience to floods to identify the essential demographic, socio -economic, psychological and 
political-cultural resilience characteristics of communities. Identifying and understanding the impact of these 
factors on strengthening social resilience to the consequences of flood disasters provides clear guidelines through 
which citizens can most adequately prepare, face and recover from the effects of flood disasters.  
 
2. Literary review 
 
Demographic characteristics 
 
Demographic characteristics of the community, such as gender and age, are recognised in numerous studies as 
critical influencing factors that determine the population's ability to prepare for, cope with, respond to and recover 
from the harmful effects of floods (Ahmad & Afzal, 2020; Koks et al. , 2015; Salvati et al., 2019; Scherzer et al., 
2019; Soetanto, Mullins & Achour, 2017). Demographic factors may help explain why two people living in the 
same geographic area have different perceptions of flood risk and show other behaviours in flood-related disasters 
(Soetanto, Mullins & Achour, 2017). Identifying potentially vulnerable groups in terms of gender and age and 
recognising the circumstances in which people have lost their lives are significant in improving human security 
and increasing community resilience. Gathering the necessary data on the age and gender structure of the 
community can be of great help in making recommendations for self -protection actions, planned construction of 
homes and shelters adapted to target groups, as well as proactive policies that can contribute to reducing the large 
numbers of people affected by floods (Koks et al. 2015). 
 The gender dimension of flood- related disasters is a critical area of research on social resilience, which can 
significantly improve social resilience, starting by identifying and strengthening the resilience of gender -
vulnerable groups. The catastrophic floods that hit the Republic of Serbia in 2014 raised many important issues 
of improving social resilience in the event of floods, among which the gender dimension of flood-induced disasters 
stands out. The results of a survey conducted to examine the gender dimension of disasters in the areas affected 
by the May 2014 floods in Serbia confirmed that gender is one of the most important predictors in the context of 
perception, preparedness and response to floods (Cvetković, Roder, Öcal, Tarolli & Dragićević, 2018). A critical 
study examining flood risk perception in the Republic of Ireland found a  significant correlation between gender 
differences in the affective component of flood risk perception (McDowell et al., 2020). The findings suggest that 
gender differences exist and, as such, may affect the risk to human health during and immediately aft er floods.  
 Based on the analysis of surveys, it was determined that women showed a lower level of awareness about the 
potential health risks caused by floods. Also, women tend to take activities that would supply clean drinking water 
inside the house in case of water contamination, such as boiling water or changing the source of drinking water. 
In contrast, male respondents expressed a greater propensity for physical or more typical male behaviour, such as 
using sandbags to prevent contamination before and during floods and treating or chlorinating water before 
consumption. Based on these findings, the authors suggest that gender-based behaviour can be generally described 
as internal, i.e. concentrated on taking activities within households to prevent or reduce the consequences of floods 
that are characteristic of women, and externally focused on taking actions outside the home to avoid consequences. 
Floods are characteristic of men (McDowell et al. , 2020). However, an earlier study examining the impact of 
flood exposure on gender perspective showed that higher risk perceptions did not result in higher levels of 
protective behaviour, noting that traditional gender roles predominate among women despite increased risk 
perceptions. Men are perceived as protecto rs who are more inclined to take risk- reduction measures (O’Neill et 
al., 2016). 
 Studies examining the impact of floods on rural areas in Pakistan have shown a positive link between the sexes 
of men and the adjustment of flood risk management tools about all adaptation measures (Ahmad & Afzal, 2020). 
Local traditions and customs in the field of study characterise the ideas of man's dominant role, with men being 
more capable of manual labour, construction work and taking measures to protect property from women in the 
event of disasters. Research findings from the Bodin County, Pakistan Flood Case Study point to the need to 
improve gender disparities in disaster management focusing on women's contribution to building resilience and 
sustainable development in different post-disaster contexts (Drolet et al. , 2015). The study shows that women's 
work capacity has effectively doubled due to the district’s floods. Women have traditionally been the primary 
caregivers in the flood-affected area, providing food and bas ic medical care to children and adults. In addition, 
caring for the family was further hampered after the floods, as it was necessary for them to further participate in 
the renovation of homes and agricultural land. Women affected by the difficult circumst ances called on the 
government to provide gender -sensitive services and pay more attention to the surviving victims, especially 
pregnant women and mothers in the shelters it offered. 
 The Gender Dimension Survey of Natural Disasters, focusing on women's experience in dealing with disasters 
in the city of Malabon, showed that despite their low socio-economic status, women sought to prepare for disasters 

[[PAGE 3]]
by allocating funds for emergencies and using family and personal packages. Disaster case (Reyes & Lu, 201 6). 
Being at home, women knew more about the needs of their family members, which were especially pronounced 
during disasters. Disasters have been shown to significantly affect women's work and psychological burden as 
they take on the role of guardians and  become primarily responsible for children, the elderly, and people with 
disabilities. Analysis of the impact of gender on flood resilience showed that developed countries have higher 
mortality rates than men. In comparison, less developed countries have higher mortality rates than women, 
attributed to gender inequalities, different roles in care and limited access to adequate resources. (Salvati et al. , 
2019). Gender analysis found that the floods killed more men than women in all age categories from 0 to 69, while 
the elderly female mortality rate was higher than the male mortality rate. Men's higher mortality is explained by 
men being more numerous than women in outdoor work and activities. Until recently, rescue services consisted 
entirely of men. Research conducted to examine the impact of floods on health in the gender dimension has shown 
that the effects of floods on men and women differ significantly (Adedeji et al. , 2018). The study shows that 
women or girls may be at greater risk of mental problems than men or boys after flood exposure. Human resilience 
can be enhanced by adequately preparing and building the capacity to withstand floods or reduce impacts, taking 
into account a gender-based approach. Citizen participation in strengthening flood resilience can be improved by 
providing adequate information within civil protection plans by specifying what to do and what not to do during 
and after flooding and educating and raising citizens' awareness of hydrological hazards.  
 The factor of influence that plays a significant role in understanding the perception of risk and resistance of 
citizens to floods is the age of individuals. Research shows that the older population generally assesses risks more 
accurately than the younger population. Their risk assessment is closer to the actual level of risk to which they are 
exposed (Soetanto, Mullins & Achour, 2017). In this context, a higher level of protective behaviour and adequate 
adaptation to dangers is conditioned by increasing age, i.e.  the perception of increased vulnerability to disasters 
(Koks et al., 2015). Many extreme events show that younger people are more resilient in such situations, i.e. they 
have a greater predisposition to survive due to better physical fitness, which makes them less likely to be prone 
to preventive behaviour  and measures to become more resilient to extreme events (Ahmad & Afzal, 2020; 
Scherzer et al. , 2019; Soetanto, Mullins & Achour, 2017). The most significant interest in taking protective 
measures to reduce the risk of disa sters is characteristic of those who consider themselves most vulnerable to 
extreme events. Older people mostly hold such a perception (Soetanto, Mullins & Achour, 2017). The impact of 
disasters on the elderly population suggests that the resilience of the  elderly may be remarkably  reduced after 
disasters due to health problems. Age -related problems, such as attention, memory, cognition, and decision-
making disorders, prove significant challenges in the critical stages of risk communication, warning, evacua tion, 
or recovery, when senior citizens may be denied assistance for various reasons  (Dzialek et al., 2016). 
Possible health problems faced by the elderly include limited mobility, cognition, hearing and vision problems, 
increased vulnerability to infections, and mental well -being (Liddell & Ferreira, 2019). The greater  exposure of 
older people may also be due to financial constraints, lower education, social isolation affecting social support 
and limited access to information on disasters, health constraints and less motivation to take preventive measures 
(Dzialek et al., 2016). The findings of previous studies a re confirmed by a survey of  the impact of floods on the 
population of Italy, which showed that people over 70 have a disproportionately higher mortality rate than other 
age groups in the case of floods, with the results interpreted as due to increased concern for their protection during 
dangerous events (Salvati et al., 2019). 
 A recent survey of the Flood Resilience Index confirmed that the higher the percentage of children and the 
elderly in the district, the greater the vulnerability to floods and the lo wer the strength of the recovery in the 
community (Chen & Leandro, 2019). The age of the population in a particular  area can affect the increased 
vulnerability to floods in two ways, depending on whether the households are older or younger (Scherzer et al. , 
2019). Families with small children are characterised  by a higher degree of vulnerability during the evacuation . 
They must allocate additional time and resources to take care of children during the evacuation and care. On the 
other hand, older people can often have limitations in movement , which can significantly complicate evacuation 
during floods, further increase efforts and make it more challenging to provide care to others (Ahmad & Afzal, 
2020). These difficulties and limitations that characterise older people do not mean that they cannot play an 
essential role in flood risk management and strengthening the community’s resilience . Older people can be 
important information on flood risk and responses, especially if they have significant life experience  in flood-
prone areas. A study examining flood mitigation strategies based on age groups showed that households younger 
than 25 and older than 40 are most vulnerable to floods (Ahmad & Afzal, 2020). The inadequacy of the youth 
experience and the lack of energy in the elderly population were the main obstacles in adjusting mitigation 
strategies compared to middle -aged households. Elderly households were characterised  by protective measures 
such as arranging sandbags, building a house with reinforced material and strengthening foundations. In contrast, 
households with younger members were represented  by preparing storage space upstairs and building shelters in 
front of homes as mitigation measures. 
 In contrast to the previous research, a study examining the impact of age on risk perception showed a different 
trend of the effects of ageing on perceived vulnerability, i.e., the feeling of vulnerability was characterised by a 

[[PAGE 4]]
tendency to increase up to 55 years, while respondents older than 55 showed less vulnerability to floods (Adelman 
& Asiyanbi, 2015). In this case, the experience proved to be a significant advantage in countering floods. Also, 
during the mentioned examination of the resistance of rural areas to floods, a positive combination effect of a 
higher age coefficient on mitigation and adaptation measures were determined. It has been observed that older 
households prefer elevated ground floors and precautionary savings to households with a younger population. It 
is essential to point out that the able-bodied population is a crucial category of the population that is more capable 
of faster evacuation in case of floods than children or the elderly and participation in supporting others during 
evacuation (Scherzer et al. , 2019). Given that the elderly population has a weaker ability to place sandbags to 
protect their households from rising water quickly, areas, where the majority population is elderly, should be more 
adequately protected by flood protection infrastructure rather than individual flood mitiga tion measures. Action 
before floods Identifying socially vulnerable groups is essential because it can significantly help policymakers 
develop the most effective mitigation measures in flood-prone areas (Cox et al., 2015). 
 
Socio-economic 
 
Socio-economic status includes various dimensions of social existence, such as wealth or poverty, as well as 
access to information, knowledge, political representation and power, making it one of the critical indicators of 
citizens' ability to prepare, respond adequately and recover from disasters (Dzialek et al., 2016). Socio-economic 
indicators are among the most frequently mentioned indicators in the literature on social resilience (Khoja et al. , 
2020; Rufat et al., 2015). Social resilience in the context of a disaster is conditioned by the circumstances in which 
the local community is in the pre -and post-disaster phases and how the community responds to the crisis during 
the event (Khalili et al. , 2015). Therefore, indicators that will represent each pha se of a disaster are needed in 
determining and measuring social resilience. These are most often income, savings and contingencies, 
employment, car ownership, homeownership and health insurance (Khoja et al., 2020). Employment and income 
appear to be criti cal indicators of an individual's and the community's ability to recover from disaster -related 
damage and losses. In contrast, lower -income individuals are less flexible and adaptable during crises than high-
income individuals. Although property ownership increases individual costs resulting from disasters, these costs 
often do not exceed the total income of wealthier households. Their ability to cope with catastrophe remains 
relatively high (Rufat et al., 2015). 
 The size of households and the presence of children in the home are essential family characteristics that affect 
risk perception. A study conducted in rural China shows that the ability to perceive flood risk decreases with an 
increasing number of people in the household. In contrast, households wi th children under 12 show a higher risk 
perception than those without children at home (Liu, Li, Shen, Xie & Zhang, 2018). The share of dependents is a 
significant factor that affects the sensitivity of households to the risk of floods, i.e. more dependent  children or 
the elderly in the home increases its sensitivity to the risk of floods, as dependents may require additional care 
and appropriate food that may not be possible to organise during floods (Shah et al., 2018). In the event of sudden 
natural disasters such as floods, children are more likely to become victims; as a result of which, families with 
children should be more motivated to take measures to protect their families. Single-parent households often have 
limited financial resources that they ca n set aside for their children’s care, negatively affecting flood resilience 
and recovery (Dzialek, Fiedeń, Listwan-Franczak & Franczak, 2016). Households with more than three children 
show greater preparedness for floods, while families composed only of older ones show significantly lower 
preparedness for floods (Shah et al., 2018). Children, too, can contribute to strengthening local ties and involving 
adults in communication and risk education through their schooling, leisure and friendship networks. The se 
reasons indicate the importance of directing special efforts and attention to designing adequate plans and programs 
for educating children in disaster management to encourage them to contribute to strengthening the social 
resilience of their local community. 
 The health and healthy lifestyle of individuals are essential characteristics of community resilience. A health 
and well-being approach has been applied in many studies to indicate stability (Adelyan & Asiyanbi, 2016; Rufat 
et al., 2015; Saja et al. , 2018; Qasim et al. , 2016). State and local government structures in charge of primary 
health care are responsible for working with residents in public health education and preventive care to limit 
exposure to flood -related diseases (Saulnier, Hanson, Möl sted Alvesson & Von Schreeb, 2018). Indicators for 
measuring equal access to health services are the availability of preventive health measures, physical resources in 
the health sector, i.e. institutions, human resources in the health sector and access to health services, including 
primary health care institutions. Access to health facilities is assessed by measures such as the distance to the 
medical facility and the availability of necessary medicines and beds in hospitals (Saja et al. , 2018). Floods hurt 
physical and mental health, with the most significant impact of floods on health being death by drowning. 
Approximately one-third of all deaths during flood events occur beyond floodwaters and result from dehydration, 
stroke, lack of medical supplies, and  health problems that are often overlooked before floods (Saulnier et al. , 
2018). Health problems directly or indirectly related to floods are diarrhoea, acute respiratory infections, skin 
infections, vector-borne diseases and injuries (Saulnier et al. , 2018). Then, malaria, hepatitis, intestinal diseases, 

[[PAGE 5]]
and mental health problems, including depression, stand out as more serious health problems related to floods 
(Adelyan & Asiyanbi, 2016). Health problems are also the drivers and consequences of social vulnerability to 
floods, with unique challenges during and after floods being the evacuation and care of people with low self-help 
capacity, long -term or chronic patients in need of continuous maintenance, and patients in need of home care 
(Qasim et al., 2016). The psychological effects of floods are more severe after floods. They have existed for a 
long time, mainly due to conflicts with insurance companies and homeowners and disruptions to commercial, 
public, health and municipal services (Rufat et al. , 201 5). Qazim et al.  (2016) state that limited mobility, 
dependence on care and reliance on medications cause particular difficulties during evacuation.  
 Also, recovery processes are significantly hampered in conditions of disruption of services that are of 
existential importance for the population with special needs, with a low percentage of people with disabilities 
proving to be a significant contributing factor to increasing community resilience (Qasim et al. , 2016). People 
with specific needs such as physical or mental disabilities and the elderly, who need special care, often report that 
no one consults them for disaster management activities (Saja et al. , 2018). When it comes to children, parental 
support is a crucial protective mechanism for improving the ir resilience, where the search for emotional support 
is key to building strength in different contexts. Its availability is further strengthened when there are strong 
community relationships (Graber, Pichon & Carabine, 2015). . These relationships, togeth er with social support 
before, during and after the disaster, create reserves for building the emotional and practical resources necessary 
for coping that are determined by persistent and ubiquitous stressors that further complicate reactions to 
physiological stress and psychological response. Public health measures taken are microbiological surveillance of 
public water supplies and private wells and enhanced surveillance during and after heavy rainfall (Saulnier et al., 
2018). It is essential to emphasise the great importance of solving mental health disorders, mostly neglected in 
populations affected by floods. For affected communities and families displaced by floods, psychosocial services 
aimed at psychological counselling and care to alleviate possible mental health problems such as depression and 
despair should be a priority, especially in the post-flood period (Adeljan & Asiyanbi, 2016). 
 In addition to providing professional psychological counselling and assistance to flood -prone populations, 
strong s ocial ties are critical to strengthening mental health and resilience as they significantly prevent post-
traumatic stress disorder, anxiety and post -disaster depression (Babcicky & Seebauer, 2017). The availability of 
projects whose focus is on people with disabilities and their involvement in public events to improve disaster 
management can help establish equality for people with disabilities (Adelyan & Asiyanbi, 2016). Prioritising 
preventive and primary health care and family counselling and support should be encouraged to develop real risk 
priorities in public. Poor environmental conditions in many communities, characterised by exposed drains and 
sewers carrying raw sewage and solid waste flowing to roads and houses, are the sources of most flood -related 
diseases (Adelyan & Asiyanbi, 2016). An image of the social vulnerability of the area can be an essential tool 
when conducting campaigns to increase risk awareness and preparedness for floods. In this way, risk information 
can be adapted to different vulnerable groups, which can be highly effective given that providing flood risk 
information can significantly contribute to raising risk awareness, especially if this information is adequately 
tailored to the individual needs of the vulnerable population (Cox et al., 2015). 
 Education has a highly significant impact on the development of people's perception of environmental hazards, 
i.e. a notable increase in the level of education of respondents increases the perception of flood risk, and thus the 
importance of preparedness for such situations, which in turn contributes to increased resilience (Restemeyer et 
al., 2015). Access to education provides awareness and training necessary for disaster preparedness with measures 
such as access to adult education and training programs, the level of disparities in secondary education between 
different social groups, and the ability of schools to continue their role after disasters can be important indicators 
for assessing access education (Saja, Teo, Goonetilleke, & Ziyath, 2018). Higher levels of education often result 
in improved living wages, with educated people being shown to understand better and access information on 
warning and recovery and thus be able to respond better and recover from disorders (Khoja et al. , 2020). 
Examining the impact of education on flood resilience, Shah et al.  (2018) found that higher levels of education 
can result in increased property ownership, where flood damage costs are higher for wealthier households in 
absolute terms. Still, flood damage costs represent a smaller percentage of more affluent households' total income 
and capital. In contrast, lower education is more likely to coincide with poverty, overpopulation, unemployment, 
income inequality and marginalisation. 
 The results of research conducted in Pakistan and the goal of determining the impact of education on the 
perception of flood risk show that the teaching of respondents has a positive correlation with risk perception, i.e. 
that higher education contributes to better preparedness and response to flood disasters (Qasim et al. , 2015). 
Although robustness requires a great deal of expertise in technical engineering and planning, adaptability requires 
expertise in reducing vulnerabilities. At the same time, local knowledge can be essential in identifying appropriate 
and socially accepted water retention areas. Transformability, in turn , requires creativity to generate new and 
innovative solutions and openness to new ideas for their actual testing (Restemeyer et al. , 2015). Using a risk-
focused approach, it was found that a higher level of education of respondents reduces the feeling of vulnerability, 
i.e., more educated people showed a higher degree of understanding of weather forecasts, thus avoiding hostile 

[[PAGE 6]]
adjustment measures (Adeljan & Asiyanbi, 2016). A similar pattern was observed in the occupation, with 
professionals and civil servants showing less vulnerability than traders, artisans, farmers, and the unemployed. 
 Exciting and vital for building and strengthening community resilience is the concept of lay knowledge, which 
can be defined as local, informal, traditional or folk know ledge that contains subjective narrative reports and 
stories created to understand, explain and assign meaning to events in everyday life (McEwen et al. , 2017). 
Traditional knowledge of the environment is understood as cumulative and shared knowledge, practice, and belief 
passed down through generations through cultural processes of cosmological relationships between living beings 
and between living beings and their environment (Lazrus, 2015). Guided by this definition and focusing on an 
extended period as well as a long -standing relationship between the bearers of traditional knowledge about the 
environment and natural resources, this type of knowledge is an essential tool for researching attitudes about 
nature and how they manifest through resource management. for place and specific cultural practices. Traditional 
knowledge can be used effectively to educate about hazards and improve responses to warnings. The centuries -
old conventional knowledge of tribal groups worldwide has not been wildly recognised, pr eserved and 
documented but needs to be implemented to formulate effective disaster management strategies (Nakanishi et al., 
2018). Local knowledge systems that include moral codes, cosmic explanations, and adaptive characteristics 
provide insight into soci al and environmental change (Lazrus, 2017). This type of knowledge is essential in 
various ecological changes, both in observing the directions and degrees of change that occur at the local level 
and adapting social responses to disasters that appear sudde nly or gradually. The Sendai Framework also 
emphasises the importance of “traditional, indigenous and local knowledge and practices” used “to complement 
scientific knowledge in disaster risk assessment” (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 2 015, p. 
10). 
 Implementing structured ways of integrating formal, i.e. scientific and traditional knowledge systems 
organised by centralised authorities would significantly contribute to the development of citizens' resilience to 
develop sustainable partne rships between stakeholders at different levels within governments and communities 
(Nakanishi et al., 2018). This would also contribute to determining the respective responsibilities of national, local 
authorities and the community in the event of natural disasters and their consequences. Focusing on observation 
and knowledge of changes in the environment means analysing the systems that people develop over time by their 
views of the world to understand the environment and its role, i.e. structures and processes underlying the idea of 
the environment (Lazrus, 2017). Among other things, the new and vital part of urban planners is integrating both 
types of knowledge that would strengthen efforts in the development and planning of civil society to mitigate the 
consequences of disasters. In addition to educating citizens, essential and fruitful measures in improving 
preparedness and dealing with floods and confrontation are participation in training courses, adjusting production, 
changing and adjusting work and evacuation from the affected areas. Training is necessary because they represent 
another type of education. They can be of particular importance for farmers by providing them with the required 
skills and knowledge to have the conditions to prepare and protect their agricultural land and livestock from floods 
(Ha Anh et al. , 2018). This type of preparation makes the household more resilient and able to cope with and 
recover from the negative consequences of floods.  
 Economic resilience is critical because it  increases the financial capacity of individuals and communities in 
the event of floods, i.e. an economically stable household is characterised by a higher degree of risk preparedness 
(Qasim et al., 2016). Income and poverty are critical drivers of social vulnerability, primarily because income is 
closely linked to other forms of capital used as social vulnerability indicators to floods (Rufat et al., 2015). These 
indicators include access to education, wealth and type of employment, overcrowding, non- household or car 
ownership, and unemployment. Education is an example of combining income with other forms of capital, where 
higher levels of education can lead to better -paid jobs and higher incomes (Shah et al. , 2018). Higher  income 
means that people can affo rd to take preventive measures such as repairing houses buying food and water and 
purchasing better and more resilient equipment. At the same time, low -income families have limited financial 
capacity to prepare for floods (Ha Anh et al. , 2018). Employment is an essential factor that can condition the 
vulnerability of households to disaster risks. More employed household members are a prerequisite that the family 
will have more significant opportunities to invest in the necessary flood adaptation measures (S hah et al., 2018). 
Households with multiple sources of income show more excellent resistance to floods since they have a more 
remarkable ability to afford solid construction material, which increases households' adaptive capacity, i.e. 
strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to flooding consequences (Moghdas et al. , 2019). 
 Poor and marginalised populations live in highly exposed areas with fewer employment opportunities. They 
are also less protected by formal institutions, such as those that provide disaster mitigation and recovery assistance 
(Rufat et al., 2015). In addition to the poor and marginalised facing lower costs of economic damage, the relative 
impact of adverse flood events is generally higher for low -income groups, as preparedness a nd mitigation 
activities, as well as evacuation capacity, require access to often missing economic and social resources ( Shah et 
al., 2018). Research conducted in Malawi shows that poor people are more likely to be exposed to floods than 
non-poor, emphasising that the quality of the property is essential to reduce the excessive vulnerability of the poor 
compared to the rest of the population (Qasim et al. , 2016). As a solution, they propose the implementation of 

[[PAGE 7]]
construction norms and the construction of high -quality buildings for poor people. It is essential to protect them 
with instruments of social protection. In Hungary and Georgia, increasing bias towards property vulnerabilities 
has slightly increased resilience. What characterises these countries is relatively low inequalities and a very high 
level of protection provided by the social protection system to the poor (Hallegatte et al. , 2016). Interviews 
conducted as part of a survey of citizens' resilience to floods in Bangladesh reveal that middle -income families 
have suffered the most from the disaster caused by the floods in the region (Kamal et al., 2018). The main reason 
why middle -income families have proven to be the most vulnerable is their unwillingness to accept help and 
resources, unlike poor,  marginalised people who did not hesitate to work as wage earners or get help from the 
government and NGOs. Most middle - and low-income families preferred to take loans from local businesses or 
microfinance institutions. Higher-income households were more inclined to protect their households. On the other 
hand, lower-income households were not equipped with adequate security measures, which led to more significant 
damage to homes and loss of property. The Tehran Flood Resilience Survey indicates that areas with a high level 
of equality in education, a high percentage of the independent population, access to public recreational facilities, 
high employment rates, commercial facilities and infrastructure, and access to emergency services and medical 
care are characterised by high levels of flood resistance (Moghdas et al., 2019). 
 Research conducted to examine resilient factors across Asia has shown that about 60% of people in rural 
communities experience income loss after floods. More than 75% of urban communities do not lose income after 
severe floods (Laurien et al., 2019). Spatial grouping of different socially vulnerable groups can help mitigate and 
adopt measures tailored to the specific needs within the affected neighbourhood (Cox et al. , 2015). In addition to 
the fact that there is a higher frequency of floods in rural communities in the sample, it is assumed that this finding 
is conditioned by the nature of existence in rural communities that depend on location and lack of different living 
resources. In rural communities, households depend on the agricultural sector, i.e. their agricultural land, usually 
located near the community (Laurien et al. , 2019). These circumstances indicate a high probability that if the 
community is affected by the flood, the sources of their livelihood will also be affected. In contrast, when it comes 
to urban environments, people are more likely to stay away from the necessary sources of livelihood. If floods hit 
their livelihoods, they have far more opportunities for alternatives (Laurien et al., 2019). A household’s ability to 
face and respond to a disaster largely determines the household’s socio-economic status before the disaster. Thus, 
for example, a neighbourhood consisting mainly of an affluent population can be stimulate d to implement 
measures for individual households, such as protecting the house from floods. At the same time, more considerable 
government assistance can be directed to poor neighbourhoods (Koks et al., 2015). Low-income households may 
be able to provide other resources for flood risk management activities, such as volunteering time needed to 
provide evacuation assistance or emergency preparations, such as establishing temporary flood protection.  
 The housing characteristics of flooded areas significantly affect the flood experience, readiness and well-being 
of citizens. Examination of social vulnerability in flood conditions to develop flood risk management strategies 
found that most settlements characterised by high social exposure have a large share of t enants compared to the 
percentage of private homeowners (Koks et al. , 2015). The study showed that homeowners apply significantly 
more preparatory measures than tenants and tend to be better covered by insurance than tenants. In contrast, 
tenants have little incentive to invest in initial efforts as most benefits will go to the property owner. And partly 
because I can expect relocation. Owners are also less likely to invest in properties where they do not live alone. 
In areas where livestock is an essential factor in ensuring food security in the household, any loss of livestock can 
have severe consequences for the daily caloric intake of household members, which further increases its sensitivity 
to flooding hazards (Shah et al. , 2018). As part of a survey c onducted in England to determine citizens' 
preparedness to protect property from floods, more than half of respondents who own property in England said 
they would consider supplementary insurance schemes to cover their potential flood losses ( Lo & Chan, 2 017). 
Approximately the same percentage reported a reduction in the share of vulnerable assets such as housing in the 
floodplain and cars to avoid flood damage. Also, over half of the respondents would move their valuables to a 
safe place outside the city if they could and if they knew that huge flood water was coming to their local area. 
Slightly less than half of the respondents would consider relocating if flood risks increase and seek funding for 
reconstruction if the property was severely affected. Abo ut one-third would adjust their homes to reduce flood 
vulnerability, and about a quarter was willing to seek alternative sources of income to mitigate the potential impact 
of unexpected events on livelihoods. This research indicates that individuals are mo re likely to adopt resilient 
strategies if faced with higher social expectations and if they are more closely connected to the community. 
Homeowners, especially those not required to insure against floods, must trust the local government to deal with 
climate risks and understand the importance of purchasing flood insurance (Atreya, Ferreira & Michel -Kerjan, 
2015 ). For this reason, local governments must inform residents about their real flood risks (Shao et al. , 2017).  
 The interest in flood insurance ste ms from the need to find an effective way to compensate those who have 
suffered losses and manage the financial risk of possible losses (Surminski & Eldridge, 2017). Hudson et al. 
(Hudson, Botzen & Aerts, 2019) explain that insurance, in its most basic form, is a mechanism where risks or part 
of the risk are transferred from one side of the insured to the other side insurer in exchange for payment. Reducing 
uncertainty is one of the most important mechanisms that drive economic systems. Without insurance, many 

[[PAGE 8]]
activities and processes would be considered too risky and would not be undertaken. Those affected by the loss 
would not be able to recover. Households decide to buy insurance , except in situations where they are obliged to 
purchase insurance, only if the subjective expected profitability of insurance is higher than the anticipated 
profitability of non-insurance and if the premium is affordable (Hudson, Botzen & Aerts, 2019). Also, in addition 
to this primary function, insurance can encourage risk reduction, promote adaptation activities and address the 
primary physical risks that determine the impact of floods. This could potentially link both aspects through the 
private sector , with insurance as a market mechanism, relieving the burden on public budgets (Surminski & 
Eldridge, 2017). 
 Using mitigation measures as a prerequisite for a household to receive a discount on a flood insurance premium 
can encourage a household to take m itigation measures if it did not do so initially. The stronger the risk -based 
premiums, the stronger this incentive will be. If in some market structures and areas, the flood insurance premium 
is too low, and thus the discount on the premium for undertaking risk mitigation measures, this may have 
undesirable consequences on the incentive to change the behaviour of policyholders (Hudson, Botzen & Aerts, 
2019). This situation can occur in areas with a low risk of floods, and taking measures to mitigate the risk of floods 
is not cost-effective. The indirect interdependence between household risk mitigation measures and government 
flood protection standards is also essential. The government significantly impacts flood insurance premiums and 
the assumed value of avoided flood damage through flood protection measures. For example, flood risk is low in 
areas where high standards of flood protection are applied, resulting in lower premiums and lower interest in 
reducing household risk in terms of avoided flood damage  or premium discounts compared to areas with low 
protection standards. from floods (Hudson, Botzen & Aerts, 2019). Insurance is considered inaccessible when the 
premium is higher than the disposable household income above the poverty line (Hudson, Botzen, Feyen & Aerts, 
2016). However, risk- based premiums mean that high premiums can occur in high- risk areas when risk -based 
premiums are in place. Residents do not take risk mitigation measures, which means that these premiums cannot 
be affordable or economically acceptable. A similar budget constraint is characterised by the application of risk 
mitigation measures, where this measure is taken only if it is available at the time of purchase given any insurance 
costs because although a measure may be helpful in the long run, the household is unlikely to apply such a measure 
when it is currently unavailable (Hudson et al., 2019). A survey to determine individual flood insurance purchase 
decisions confirmed that homeownership influences voluntary behaviour when buying flood insurance. Residents 
are more likely to purchase flood insurance than those who rent houses (Shao et al. , 2017).  
 The study also confirmed that the distance from the coast hurts the voluntary decision of individuals to buy 
flood insurance. People living relatively far from the beach usually feel less sensitive to the effects of floods, 
which is why they choose not to purchase flood insurance. The results of a survey conducted in Georgia to 
determine the factors influencing the decision to buy flood insurance confirmed that those who lack confidence 
in the responsibility of local authorities rarely voluntarily purchase flood insurance, which indicates the 
importance of building trust between citizens and leaders (Atreya, Ferreira & Michel -Kerjan, 2015). Local 
policymakers need to find ways to gain citizens’ trust to actively encourage them to seek flood protection 
measures. Higher levels of education have also been shown to be a significant factor in making people more likely 
to buy flood insurance. The research results are also important, indicating that among all variables related to 
environmental perception, beliefs in increasing the frequency of floods and the strength of hurricanes have the 
most stimulating effect on voluntary decisions to purchase flood insurance (Shao et al. , 2017). People who are 
aware that the amount of flooding has increased and that hurricanes have become stronger are more likely to 
voluntarily buy flood insurance than those not aware of it (Atreya et al. , 2015). The link between the perception 
of increased flooding and the voluntary purchase of flood insurance is immediate. Since hurricane strength is 
linked to floods due to storm surges, awareness of increased hurricane strength leads to a higher probability of 
voluntary purchase of flood insurance. Also, empirical findings suggest that flood damage that has occurred in 
previous years has a posi tive effect on the commitment to invest in flood insurance (Atreya et al. , 2015). An 
examination of the factors contributing to the decision to purchase flood protection insurance in Florida and Texas 
confirmed that residents who voluntarily purchased flood insurance, on average, have a significantly higher 
estimated value of the property they own (Brody, Highfield, Wilson, Lindell & Blessing, 2017). Although the 
greater distance from the coast does not necessarily mean less risk of flooding, which may keep residents in the 
lurch. In other words, a greater distance from the beach can create an apparent sense of security. Trust in the local 
government is another positive factor motivating residents to voluntarily invest in flood insurance (Shao et al. , 
2017). 
 
3. Methods 
 
The subject of the research includes the examination of influencing factors that determine and improve social 
resistance to the consequences of disasters caused by floods. The increased frequency and intensity of floods, as 
well as the increasing exposure of citizens and their property to the consequences of floods, require a more 
complex approach that involves the involvement of citizens in strengthening preparedness and response to floods, 

[[PAGE 9]]
as a result of which the examination of the aforementioned influencing factors is of key importance for the future 
development of strategies and measures to reduce flood risk.  The goal of the conducted research, which arises 
from the stated subject of research, is a scientific description of the influencing  factors that determine social 
resistance to the consequences of disasters caused by floods, identified within the analysis of the content of the 
literature devoted to examining social resistance to floods. The explicative goal of the research refers to the 
identification and understanding of social resilience to floods by the identified influencing factors. Based on the 
analysis of the content of the collected international literature for research purposes, an online survey 
questionnaire was formulated following the subject and objectives of the research to determine the conditions and 
ways of improving social resistance to the consequences of disasters caused by floods.  
 
3.1. Instrument 
 
The questions were designed in three units with clearly indicated research expectations and types of answers that 
were mainly based on the choice of answers on a Likert scale to determine the degree of agreement with the given 
statements on a scale from 1 - absolute disagreement to 5 - absolute agreement. The f irst group of questions 
consists of general questions related to the demographic and socio- economic characteristics of the respondents. 
The second group of questions consists of questions examining the degree of agreement of respondents with given 
statements related to the perception of risk, social cohesion, trust in public institutions and the involvement of 
citizens in the preparation of planning documents and communication about risk. The third group of questions 
refers to the examination of the possibility of improving social resilience to floods. 
 
3.2. Sample 
 
The sample included a total of 261 respondents in the area of Belgrade, of which the majority were under the age 
of 25 (43.3%). Also, the sample included 50 respondents (19.2%) aged 26 to 35 years, 34 respondents (13%) aged 
36 to 45 years, 45 respondents (17.2%) aged 46 to 55 years and 19 respondents (7.3%) aged over 55 years. 
Following the proportional representation of the sexes in the Republic of Serbia, the sample consisted to the 
greatest extent of members of the female population (70.9%), while male respondents were represented by a total 
of 29.1% in the research sample. Regarding the level of education obtained, it was determined that the largest 
number of respondents (38.3%) had secondary education, while the smallest number of respondents had 
completed doctoral academic studies (1.1%) and elementary school (1.5%). In addition, 29 respondents (11.1%) 
reported having completed higher education, 85 respondents (32.6%) had basic academic studies, and 40 
respondents (15.3%) indicated master's academic studies. The answers to the question about the respondents' 
current marital status indicate that 81 respondents (31%) are not in a relationship, 61 respondents (23.4%) are in 
a relationship, 11 re spondents (4.2%) are engaged, 88 respondents (33.7%) ) is married, 12 respondents (4.6%) 
are divorced, while 8 respondents (3.1%) belong to the widow/widow category. More than half of the respondents 
included in the sample (55.6%) answered the question about their current employment status that they were 
employed, while 116 respondents (44.4%) were unemployed. Examining the amount of average monthly income 
that respondents earn shows that 78 respondents (29.9%) earn incomes up to 25,000 dinars, 74 respondents 
(28.4%) up to 50,000 dinars, 75 respondents (28.7%) up to 80,000 dinars, while the incomes of 34 respondents 
(13%) reach over 100,000 dinars monthly. When asked whether they are the owners of the house/apartment they 
live in, 88 respondents (33.7%) answered yes, while 173 respondents (66.3%) answered negatively. 
 
3.3. Analysis of data 
 
After the completion of the electronic survey, the results of the surveys were entered into a database, reviewed 
and analyzed to identify and eliminate potential errors. This was followed by the use of descriptive statistical 
analysis to further analyze the data. Furthermore, the relationships between the selected independent and 
dependent variables that are the subject of our research were examined using the Chi -square test, T -test and 
ANOVA. 
 
4. Results 
 
On a Likert scale from 1 to 5 (1 - I am absolutely not familiar; 5 - I am absolutely familiar) respondents rated their 
views on the degree of familiarity with the flood phenomenon. According to the findings, 5 res pondents (1.9%) 
were absolutely not familiar with the phenomenon of flooding, 14 respondents (5.4%) were significantly 

[[PAGE 10]]
unfamiliar, 37 respondents (14.2%) were moderately familiar, 60 respondents (23%) are familiar to a significant 
extent, while 145 respondents (55.6%) believe that they are absolutely familiar with the phenomenon of floods.  
 The transfer of experiences and knowledge about floods at the level of the local community, family, friends 
and colleagues plays a significant role in the overall level of awareness, knowledge and preparedness at all levels 
of society's functioning. Consequently, the respondents were asked whether family members, friends and 
colleagues passed on experiences and knowledge about floods to them, to which they answered with grades from 
1 to 5 on a Likert scale (1 -  they absolutely did not pass on experiences and knowledge to me; 5 -  to an absolute 
extent, they transferred experiences and knowledge to me). On that occasion, 16 respondents (6.1%) pointed out 
that their knowledge  and experiences about floods were absolutely not passed on to them by family members, 
friends and colleagues, and 37 respondents (14.2%) said that they were not passed on to a significant extent, 53 
respondents (20.3%) that they were transmitted to them t o an average extent, 56 respondents (21.5%) that they 
were transmitted to them to a significant extent, while the largest number of respondents (37.5%) believe that their 
friends, family and colleagues absolutely transferred experiences and knowledge about  floods. 
 To the question, "Is the risk of flooding a significant cause of fear for the residents of your local community?", 
respondents answered by expressing their views on a Likert scale from 1 to 5 (1 -  absolutely not a significant 
cause; 5 -  absolutely a significant cause), when the following was determined: 42 respondents (16.1%) believe 
that the risk of floods is absolutely not a significant cause of fear, 60 respondents (23%) believe that the risk of 
floods is not a significant cause of fear, 71 res pondents (27, 2%) that the risk is a moderate cause of fear, 37 
respondents (14.2%) that the risk is a significant cause of fear, while 51 respondents (19.5%) point out that the 
risk of flooding is an absolutely significant cause of fear among the residents of their local community. 
 When it comes to the degree of vulnerability of households to the risk of flooding, the findings indicate that 
91 respondents (34.9%) believe that their household is absolutely not threatened by flood risks and 84 respondents 
(32.2%) that it is not threatened to a significant extent. On the other hand, 60 respondents (23%) point out that 
their household is moderately threatened, 15 respondents (5.7%) that it is significantly threatened, while 11 
respondents (4.2%) point out that  their household is threatened by the risk of floods evaluates with the highest 
score on the scale, i.e. absolute endangerment.  Bearing in mind that the success of all other stages of flood risk 
management largely depends on the implementation of preventive measures, respondents were asked to rate to 
what extent on a Likert scale from 1 to 5 (1 - they do not undertake to an absolute extent; 5 - they undertake to an 
absolute extent) residents of their local community take preventive flood protection measures , including training 
and seminars on dealing with floods, flood insurance, having personal protective equipment, tools, supplies of 
food, water, medicine, etc. According to the findings, the largest number of respondents believe that residents of 
the local  community absolutely (38.3%) and to a significant extent (32.6%) do not take preventive measures 
against floods. Also, 48 respondents (18.4%) believe that residents take protective measures to an average extent, 
20 respondents (7.7%) believe that they take protective measures to a significant extent, while only 8 respondents 
(3.1%) estimate that the taking of preventive flood protection measures by the residents of the local community 
is carried out to an absolute extent. 
 Although the Law on Disaster Risk Reduction and Emergency Management and other relevant laws and by-
laws regulate a wide range of rights and obligations of residents in the event of emergenc ies caused by various 
natural hazards, including floods, researching public awareness about them is of great importance for achieving 
adequate and effective response, as well as recovery after a disaster. Based on that, the respondents were asked to 
what extent the residents of their local community are aware of their rights and obligations  in the mentioned 
circumstances. According to the results, the largest number of respondents believe that knowledge of rights and 
duties in emergencies caused by floods is absolutely (30.3%) or significantly (34.9%) non -existent. On the other 
hand, 59 respondents (22.6%) believe that residents are moderately familiar with their rights and obligations, 25 
respondents (9.6%) believe that they are significantly familiar, while 7 respondents (2.7%) point out that the 
residents of their local community are fully  aware of their rights and obligations in case of emergenc ies caused 
by floods. 
 Examining the views of the respondents on the degree to which the residents of their local community are 
ready to leave their homes and evacuate to the facilities designated by the competent headquarters for emergencies 
for the reception of the population in case of emergenc ies caused by floods produced the following results: 43 
respondents (16.5% ) believes that the population is absolutely not ready, 54 respondents (20.7%) that they are 
not ready to a significant extent, 84 respondents (32.2%) that the population's readiness is at a medium level, 47 
respondents (18%) that the readiness is on a higher level, while 33 respondents (12.6%) expressed their opinion 
and assessment ab out the absolute readiness of the residents of their local community to leave their homes and 
evacuate to reception facilities in case of disasters caused by floods. 

[[PAGE 11]]
 As the participation of informal actors in protection and rescue is often a valuable reso urce in the system of 
disaster risk reduction and management in emergenc ies, the willingness of the residents of the local community 
to participate in the activities of protection and rescue of the vulnerable population was examined, which the 
respondents rated on a Likert scale from 1 to 5 (1 –  to an absolute extent they would not be ready to participate; 
5 – to an absolute extent they would be ready to participate). On that occasion, it was determined that 14 
respondents (5.4%) believed that residents would not be absolutely ready to undertake the mentioned activities, 
17 respondents (6.5%) that they would not be ready to a significant extent and 78 respondents (29 .9%) to show 
a willingness to participate in a medium measure. On the contrary, a significan t number of respondents pointed 
out that the residents of their local community would be significantly (36%) and absolutely (22.2%) ready to 
participate in the activities of protection and rescue of the vulnerable population in case of emergenc ies caused 
by floods. 
 There is a legal obligation for the owners and users of facilities and premises in public use, as well as private 
facilities suitable for accommodation, regarding the temporary accommodation of citizens by order of the 
competent headquarters. In addition, the law stipulates that if it is not possible to take care of the vulnerable in the 
previously mentioned way, the care is carried out in tent settlements. Based on that, the respondents were asked 
to rate the readiness of the residents of their local community to provide shelter and help to the vulnerable in case 
of emergencies caused by floods. Respondents mostly pointed out that the residents of their local community are 
moderately (33.3%) and significantly (32.6%) ready to provide shelter and help to the vulnerable. In addition, 8 
respondents (3.1%) believe that residents are absolutely not ready to provide assistance and shelter, 33 respondents 
(12.6%) believe that they are significantly unprepared, while 48 respondents (18.4%) share an attitude about the 
absolute readiness of the inhabitants to provide shelter and help to the vulnerable in case of emergency situations 
caused by floods. 
 When asked to what extent trust in neighbou rs and strong social ties can contribute to the strengthening of 
social capital, and thus the social resistance of the local community to floods, 5 respondents (1.9%) answered that 
they absolutely cannot contribute, 7 respondents (2.7%) that they cannot contribute to a significant extent, 46 
respondents (17.6%) that they can contribute to a medium extent, 72 respondents (27.6%) that they can contribute 
to a significant extent, while the largest number, i.e. more than half of the respondents (50.2%) pointed out that 
trust in neighbours and strong social ties can absolutely contribute to the strengthening of social capital, and thus 
the social resistance of their local community to floods.  The trust of the residents of the local community in the 
services responsible for dealing with emergency situations (emergency headquarters, police, fire and rescue unit, 
civil protection unit, emergency medical aid service, Red Cross) was assessed by the respondents as follows: the 
largest number of respondents believe that residents moderately (35.2%) and to a significant extent (25.3%) have 
confidence in competent services; then, 16 respondents (6.1%) believe that there is absolutely no trust, 53 
respondents (20.3%) that there is no trust to a significant extent, while, in contrast, 34 respondents (13%) answered 
that into an absolute extent there is trust in the competent emergency response services among the residents of 
their local community. 
 This was followed by an assessment of the capacities and means possessed by the competent local 
administration services for deal ing with emergency situations caused by floods. According to the results, 41 
respondents (15.7%) believe that the capacities and means of the competent services are absolutely insufficient, 
72 respondents (27.6%) that they are significantly insufficient, 95 respondents (36.4%) that they are moderately 
sufficient, 39 respondents (14.9%) that they are sufficient to a significant extent, while 14 respondents (5.4%) 
assessed the absolute sufficiency of the current capacities and means of the competent services of their local 
administration for dealing with emergency situations caused by floods. Despite the established duties of competent 
authorities and services for dealing with emergenc ies in terms of regular and timely notification and informing 
residents about flood risks, measures taken and possible consequences, 56 respondents (21.5%) believe that 
informing residents of their local community about the risk from floods through the media is absolutely not carried 
out regularly and promptly, 65 respondents (24. 9%) believe that it is not carried out regularly and on time  to a 
significant extent, while 66 respondents (25.3%) believe that it is carried out regularly and to a medium extent 
and timely. On the contrary, 46 respondents (17.6%) point out that the competent authorities and services provide 
regular and timely information through the media to a significant extent, while 28 respondents (10.7%) believe 
that the competent authorities absolutely provide regular and timely information to the residents their loca l 
communities about flood risks through the media. 
 Bearing in mind that risk communication, as an important element of the disaster risk management process, 
increasingly includes a two- way approach to communication instead of the former ruling paradigm "from top to 
bottom", i.e. a one-way process of communication from the authorities to citizens, the respondents were asked to 
rate the degree of involvement of the residents of their local communities in flood risk communication and 

[[PAGE 12]]
development of flood risk reduction strategies. On that occasion, the largest  number of respondents pointed out 
that residents were absolutely (28.7%) and to a significant extent (28.7%) not involved in risk communication and 
development of flood risk reduction strategies. On the other hand, 64 respondents (24.5%) believe that resi dents 
are moderately involved in risk communication and strategy development, 32 respondents (12.3%) believe that 
they are significantly involved, while 15 respondents (5.7 %) expressed their opinion on the absolute involvement 
of the inhabitants of their local community in the aforementioned flood risk reduction activities.  
 The introduction of mandatory education and training of citizens to deal with emergenc ies caused by floods 
has long been the subject of domestic and foreign literature, as well as relevant laws and strategies in the field of 
emergency management. However, in practice there is no consistent and timely application of the regulations, so 
the aforementioned goal has not yet been realized. Therefore, the respondents were asked to assess to what extent 
the introduction of mandatory education and training of citizens to deal with emergencies caused by floods would 
contribute to strengthening the social resilience of their local community. According to the findings, the largest 
number of respondents (51%) believe that the introduction of mandatory education and training would absolutely 
contribute to strengthening social resilience, while the smallest number of respondents (1.5%) believe that it would 
absolutely not contribute. In addition, 12 respondents (4.6%) stated that they would not contribute to a significant 
extent, 41 respondents (15.7%) that they would contribute to a moderate extent, while 71 respondents (27.2%) 
point out that the introduction of compulsory education would and training of citizens to deal with emergencie s 
caused by floods significantly contributed to the strengthening of the social resilience of their local community.  
Concerning the stated statement, "The participation of residents in protection and rescue activities in case of 
emergencies caused by floods would significantly contribute to strengthening the social resistance of your local 
community to floods", respondents rated their views on a Likert scale from 1 to 5 (1 -  in absolute measure would 
not significantly cont ribute; 5 - in absolute measure would significantly contribute), where more than half of 
respondents (55.9%) gave the highest rating on the scale, thereby expressing the opinion that the participation of 
residents in absolute measure would significantly contribute to strengthening social resilience. In addition, 4 
respondents (1.5%) believe that participation in absolute terms would not significantly contribute to strengthening 
social resilience, 7 respondents (2.7%) that it would not significantly contribute, 37 respondents (14.2%) that 
would moderately contribute, while 67 respondents (25.7%) state that the participation of residents in protection 
and rescue activities in case of emergencie s caused by floods would significantly contribute to strengthening the 
social resilience of their local community to floods. 
 The claim was then made that the involvement of citizens in flood risk monitoring would significantly 
contribute to strengthening the social resilience of the local community to floods, and respondents were asked to 
rate their attitudes about it. On that occasion, 3 respondents (1.1%) pointed out that the inclusion of citizens in the 
mentioned activities would absolutely not contribute to strengthening social resilience, 14 respondents (5.4%) that 
it would not significantly contribute, and 38 respondents (14, 6%) that it would contribute to a medium extent, 63 
respondents (24.1%) that it would contribute to a significant extent, while 143 respondents (54.8%) share the 
opinion that the involvement of citizens in flood risk monitoring would significantly contribute to an absolute 
extent strengthening the social resilience of their local community to floods. 
 To the question to what extent the involvement of residents in the implementation of reconstruction measures 
and activities and assistance after floods would significantly contribute to strengthening the social resilience of 
their local community, the respondents answered as follows: 4 respondents (1.5%) believe that the involvement 
of residents absolutely does not would significantly contribute to strengthening social resilience, 8 respondents 
(3.1%) believe that it would not significantly contribute to a greater extent, 33 respondents (12.6%) believe that 
it would contribute to a medium extent, 58 r espondents (22.2%) believe to a significant extent, while the largest 
number, i.e. 158 respondents (60.5%) share the belief that the involvement of residents in the implementation of 
measures and activities of reconstruction and assistance after the floods  would significantly contribute to the 
strengthening of the social resilience of their local community.  The results of examining respondents' views on 
the claim that citizens' participation in debates and the development of disaster risk reduction strategies would 
significantly contribute to strengthening the social resilience of their local community indicate that more than half, 
i.e. 139 (53.3%), of the respondents believe that the implementation of the mentioned activities would in absolute 
terms significantly contributed to the strengthening of social resilience. In contrast, the smallest number of 
respondents (2.3%) believe that it would not contribute significantly in absolute terms. In addition, it was 
determined that 15 respondents (5.7%) believed that the participation of citizens would not significantly contribute 
to the strengthening of social resilience, 37 respondents (14.2%) believed that it would contribute to a medium 
extent, while 64 respondents (24, 5%) pointed out that the participation of citizens in debates and the development 
of strategies for disaster risk reduction would significantly contribute to strengthening the social resilience of their 
local community. 

[[PAGE 13]]
 Regarding the assessment of attitudes about the degree of contribution of the  initiation of initiatives and the 
inclusion of citizens in the work and activities of local groups of citizens, humanitarian organizations and 
volunteer organizations for assisting  in emergencie s to the development of knowledge, experiences and the 
exchange of information relevant to reducing the risk of floods, it was determined that the respondents into the 
greatest extent (65.5%) believe that the mentioned activities would in absolute terms significantly contribute to 
the development of knowledge, exper iences and the exchange of information significant for reducing the risk of 
floods. Also, 3 respondents (1.1%) pointed out that in absolute terms it would not significantly contribute, 9 
respondents (3.4%) that it would not significantly contribute to a gr eater extent, 30 respondents (11.5%) that in 
the middle significantly contributed to the measure, while 48 respondents (18.4%) believe that the initiation of 
initiatives and the involvement of citizens in the work and activities of local groups of citizens , humanitarian 
organizations and volunteer organizations to assist  in emergencie s would significantly contribute to the 
development of knowledge, experiences and exchange of information relevant to flood risk reduction. After 
descriptive statistical analyses, we proceeded to examine the mean values between gender and social resilience to 
the consequences of flood disasters. Judging by the obtained results, no statistically significant relationship was 
established between gender and social resistance to the consequences of flood disasters (Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Results of the T-test between gender and social resilience to the consequences of flood-induced 
disasters. 
 t df Sig. (2-
tailed) 
Mean 
Difference 
Std. Error 
Difference 
95% Confidence Interval of 
the Difference 
Lower Upper 
Social 
resilience -0.95 259 .340 -.079 .082 -.242 .083 
 
After the T -test, we examined the correlation between the age of the respondents and social resistance to the 
consequences of floods. About  the results, we determined that there is a statistically significant correlation p  = 
0.000. The results show that there is a positive correlation that indicates that with the increase in the age of the 
respondents, the assessment of the level of resistance to the consequences of floods also increases  (Table 2). 
Table 2. Results of the correlation analysis of age and social resistance to the consequences of floods.  
 Age 
Social resilience to the consequences of floods 
Pearson Correlation 0.221** 
Sig. (2-tailed) 0.000 
N 260 
 
In addition to the correlation analyses, the results of the One -factor Analysis of Variance show that there is no 
statistically significant relationship between the respondents' education and social resilience to flooding disasters. 
Unambiguously, the results indicate that there is no statistically significant difference between responde nts with 
completed primary, secondary, higher school, college and master's academic studies.  
 
5. Discussion 
 
Starting from the analysis of the content and collected scientific research, this paper examines the demographic, 
socio-economic, psychological and political-cultural impact factors to identify key impact factors that determine 
social resilience to floods. An online survey questionnaire was selected as the instrument used to collect the 
necessary data for the research needs. Examining the correlation  between the age of the respondents and social 
resistance to the consequences of floods, it was found that there is a statistically significant correlation which 
indicates that with the increase in the age of the respondents, the assessment of the level of  resistance to floods 
increases. These results coincide with the results of research in which a positive combinational effect of a higher 
age coefficient on mitigation and adaptation measures were found (Adelcan & Asiyanbi, 2015).  
 The influence of an imp ortant factor can also explain these results: the experience of the elderly population, 
which in this context has an essential advantage in strengthening flood resistance. Examination of the mean values 
between gender and social resilience to the consequences of flood-induced disasters did not establish a statistically 
significant relationship between gender and the observed dependent variable.
 The results of a one-factor analysis 
of variance show that there is no statistically significant association between respondents' education and social 
resilience to flooding disasters. Unequivocally, the results indicate that there is no statistically significant 

[[PAGE 14]]
difference between respondents with completed primary, secondary, higher education, college and master's  
academic studies. Contrary to these findings, numerous studies have shown that a higher level of education among 
respondents increases the perception of flood risk, contributing to increased social resilience (Restemeyer et al. , 
2015; Saja et al. , 2018; Q asim et al. , 2015). Also, the results of the research indicate that monthly income, 
employment and ownership of an apartment/house do not have a significant impact on the level of resilience of 
the local community, which is contrary to research confirming that economically stable households with multiple 
sources of income and ownership of housing take preventive and adaptive flood protection measures, and thus 
show more excellent resistance to floods (Moghdas et al. , 2019; Shah et al. , 2018; Rufat et al. , 2015). Such 
research results can be explained by the lack of adequate formal and informal education programs, the 
implementation of mandatory on- the-job training and risk assessments that would encourage citizens to develop 
an awareness of the importance of strengthening flood resistance.  
 This conclusion is confirmed by the results of surveys that show that the most significant number of 
respondents believe that the local community residents, in absolute terms (38.3%), do not take preventive 
measures to protect again st floods. Furthermore, the analysis of the obtained data showed that there is a mutual 
condition of lack of experience with floods and social resilience of the local community, given that the most 
significant percentage (87.9%) had no experience with floods, with the most significant percentage of respondents 
in absolute terms, 38.3% do not take preventive flood protection measures. These results are consistent with 
numerous studies showing that experience is critical in building and strengthening social r esilience (Seebauer & 
Babcicky, 2020; Soentato et al. , 2017; Thistlethwaite, Henstra, Brown & Scott, 2018). Examining the impact of 
social ties and trust in fellow citizens on strengthening social resilience to floods, it was found that more than half 
of respondents (50.2%) believe that trust in neighbours and strong social ties can contribute to strengthening social 
capital, and thus social the resilience of their local community to floods. The same results have been confirmed in 
numerous studies on the im pact of social capital on strengthening social resilience to floods (Babcicky & 
Seebauer, 2017; Lo & Chan, 2017). 
 The results of the survey of the trust of local community residents in the services responsible for dealing with 
emergencies show that the mo st significant number of respondents believe that residents in secondary (35.2%) 
and to a significant extent (25.3%) trust the competent services, with a substantial number The examiner stated 
that he was significantly and ready to participate in the activ ities of protection and rescue of the population 
endangered by the flood. These results are compatible with a survey conducted in China, which confirms that the 
trust of residents in public institutions determines their willingness to participate in disaster management (Peng, 
Tan, Lin & Xu, 2019). More than half of the respondents (55.9%) gave the highest score on the scale, expressing 
the view that the participation of residents in flood protection and rescue activities in absolute terms would 
significantly contribute to strengthening social resilience, as confirmed by numerous studies. Studied the impact 
of co -production on strengthening social resilience to floods (Lo & Chan, 2017; O'Grady et al. , 2019). Also, 
60.5% of respondents believe that the engagem ent of residents in the implementation of measures and activities 
of reconstruction and assistance after the floods in absolute terms would significantly contribute to strengthening 
the social resilience of their local community.  
 These results are confir med by Mes et al.  (2016a), that co- production as a public service represents the 
avoidance and reduction of flood damage at the societal level through private and public measures. Examining 
the importance of citizen participation in public debates and deve loping strategies to reduce the risk of disasters 
showed that more than half, or 53.3%, of respondents, believe that implementing these activities would 
significantly strengthen social resilience to floods. Accordingly, research examining the impact of cit izen 
participation in risk communication has confirmed that effective co -production is conditioned by open 
communication channels with authorities and all stakeholders in flood risk management. This can best disseminate 
knowledge across the community (De Boer et al., 2015; Morris, McNamara & Belcher, 2019). 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
The characteristics of floods affecting states and local communities worldwide require the joint efforts of both the 
competent state authorities and local communities in dealing with and responding to flood risk. It is necessary to 
develop civic awareness, knowledge, skills and resources that will create the preconditions for building social 
resilience, one of the critical aspects of disaster risk management facing modern society. Local co mmunities 
resistant to the consequences of flood disasters need to cooperate with emergency services, local authorities and 
other relevant organisations before, during and after emergencies. Resilient communities participate in decision -
making related to emergency management, show interest in their environment, and act proactively to strengthen 
community resilience to flood disasters (Ntontis, Drury, Amlôt, Rubin & Williams, 2019). Statistical analysis of 

[[PAGE 15]]
the survey of social resistance to floods within the  local communities of the Republic of Serbia showed that age, 
experience, education, social ties, and trust in public institutions are key influencing factors that determine the 
level of social resilience to floods. The results indicate that it is necessar y to introduce programs and training for 
dealing with emergencies caused by gender, both within all levels of education and among employees in all 
sectors. 
 The goal of introducing the mentioned programs and training is to raise awareness about the risk and thus the 
resilience of local communities to the consequences of floods. According to McClymont et al.  (2020), the so-
called social resilience education is a crucial aspect of flood risk reduction in a flood risk environment that 
identifies the knowledge,  skills, values and preparedness needed to manage flood risk and improve social 
resilience to floods effectively.  Respondents also confirmed that strengthening social resilience requires 
strengthening social networking, trust and solidarity among members  of the local community. These aspects of 
social resilience can be encouraged through various initiatives and associations of citizens whose activities would 
assist in emergencies, significantly contributing to the development of knowledge, experience and exchange of 
information necessary for reducing flood risks. Accumulation of social capital through community participation 
through reliable networks can provide the required external factors that will influence individual decision-making, 
increasing the motivation of residents to prepare for the adverse effects of climate change (Lo & Chan, 2017).  
 The survey of respondents found that their participation in monitoring and communication on risk can 
significantly strengthen citizens’ trust in decision -makers and services responsible for dealing with emergencies. 
Communication networks in the form of public debates, media, personal interactions with other people, and the 
very types of social ties enable the creation of social capital through which awareness and  knowledge necessary 
to develop an appropriate level of risk perception can be formed (Lechowska, 2018). The research results indicate 
that the subject of research is an inexhaustible source of foundation for future research aimed at examining the 
factors that determine social resilience to the consequences of floods. The obtained results can significantly help 
local authorities, citizens' associations, and stakeholders in formulating strategies, plans, and initiatives that will 
improve social resilience to the consequences of floods and create preconditions for building a safe and sustainable 
environment. An obvious limitation of the research is the insufficient number of respondents in the broader area 
of the Republic of Serbia, which would provide a com plete picture of the current level of social resilience to the 
consequences of floods and the interdependence of the examined factors. 
 
7. References 
 
Adedeji, T. J., Proverbs, D. G., Xiao, H., & Oladokun, V. O. (2018). Towards a conceptual framework for property 
level flood resilience. International journal of safety and security engineering, 8(4), 493-504. 
Adelekan, I. O., & Asiyanbi, A. P. (2016). Flood risk perception in flood- affected communities in Lagos, 
Nigeria. Natural Hazards, 80(1), 445-469. 
Aerts, J. C., Botzen, W. J., Clarke, K. C., Cutter, S. L., Hall, J. W., Merz, B., & Kunreuther, H. (2018). Integrating 
human behaviour dynamics into flood disaster risk assessment. Nature Climate Change, 8(3), 193-199. 
Ahmad, D., & Afzal, M. (2020). Flood hazards and factors influencing household flood perception and mitigation 
strategies in Pakistan. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 1-13. 
Appleby-Arnold, S., Brockdorff, N., Jakovljev, I., & Zdravković, S. (2018). Applying cultural values to encourage 
disaster preparedness: Lessons from a low -hazard country.  International journal of disaster risk 
reduction, 31, 37-44. 
Ardaya, A. B., Evers, M., & Ribbe, L. (2017). What influences disaster risk perception? Intervention measures, 
flood and landslide risk perception of the population living in flood risk areas in Rio de Janeiro state, 
Brazil. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 25, 227-237. 
Atreya, A., Ferreira, S., & Michel -Kerjan, E. (2015). What drives households to buy flood insurance? New 
evidence from Georgia. Ecological Economics, 117, 153-161. 
Babcicky, P., & Seebauer, S. (2017). The two faces of social capital in private flood mitigation: opposing effects 
on risk perception, self-efficacy and coping capacity. Journal of Risk Research, 20(8), 1017-1037. 
Babcicky, P., & Seebauer, S. (2019). Unpacking Protection Motivation Theory: evidence for a separate protective 
and non-protective route in private flood mitigation behavior. Journal of risk research, 22(12), 1503-1521. 
Bamberg, S., Masson, T., Brewitt, K., & Nemetschek, N. (2017). Threat, coping and flood prevention– A meta-
analysis. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 54, 116-126. 
Bodoque, J. M., Amérigo, M., Díez -Herrero, A., García, J. A., Cortés, B., Ballesteros -Cánovas, J. A., & Olcina, 
J. (2016). Improvement of resilience of urban areas by integrating social perception in flash- flood risk 
management. Journal of Hydrology, 541, 665-676.  

[[PAGE 16]]
Bonaiuto, M., Alves, S., De Dominicis, S., & Petruccelli, I. (20 16). Place attachment and natural hazard risk: 
Research review and agenda. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 48, 33-53. 
Brody, S. D., Highfield, W. E., Wilson, M., Lindell, M. K., & Blessing, R. (2017). Understanding the motivations 
of coastal residents  to voluntarily purchase federal flood insurance.  Journal of Risk Research,  20(6), 760-
775. 
Cvetković, V. M. (2016). Fear and floods in Serbia: Citizens preparedness for responding to natural 
disaster. Zbornik Matice srpske za drustvene nauke, (155-156), 303-324. 
Cvetković, V. M., Roder, G., Öcal, A., Tarolli, P., & Dragićević, S. (2018). The role of gender in preparedness 
and response behaviors towards flood risk in Serbia.  International journal of environmental research and 
public health, 15(12), 2761. 
Dandy, J., Horwitz, P., Campbell, R., Drake, D., & Leviston, Z. (2019). Leaving home: place attachment and 
decisions to move in the face of environmental change. Regional environmental change, 19(2), 615-620. 
De Boer, J., Wouter Botzen, W. J., & Terpstra, T. (2015). More than fear induction: Toward an understanding of 
people's motivation to be well‐prepared for emergencies in flood‐prone areas. Risk analysis, 35(3), 518-535. 
De Dominicis, S., Fornara, F., Cancellieri, U. G., Twigger -Ross, C., & Bonaiuto, M. (2015). We are at risk, and 
so what? Place attachment, environmental risk perceptions and preventive coping behaviours.  Journal of 
Environmental Psychology, 43, 66-78. 
Diakakis, M., Priskos, G., & Skordoulis, M. (2018). Public perception of flood ri sk in flash flood prone areas of 
Eastern Mediterranean: The case of Attica Region in Greece.  International journal of disaster risk 
reduction, 28, 404-413. 
Drolet, J., Dominelli, L., Alston, M., Ersing, R., Mathbor, G., & Wu, H. (2015). Women rebuilding li ves post-
disaster: innovative community practices for building resilience and promoting sustainable 
development. Gender & Development, 23(3), 433-448. 
Działek, J., Biernacki, W., Fiedeń, Ł., Listwan-Franczak, K., & Franczak, P. (2016). Universal or context-specific 
social vulnerability drivers –understanding flood preparedness in southern Poland.  International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction, 19, 212-223. 
Fox-Rogers, L., Devitt, C., O’Neill, E., Brereton, F., & Clinch, J. P. (2016). Is there really “nothing you can do”? 
Pathways to enhanced flood-risk preparedness. Journal of Hydrology, 543, 330-343. 
Fuchs, S., Karagiorgos, K., Kitikidou, K., Maris, F., Paparrizos, S., & Thaler, T. (2017). Flood risk perception 
and adaptation capacity: A contribution to the socio -hydrology debate.  Hydrology and Earth System 
Sciences, 21(6), 3183. 
Garde-Hansen, J., McEwen, L., Holmes, A., & Jones, O. (2017). Sustainable flood memory: Remembering as 
resilience. Memory Studies, 10(4), 384-405. 
Graber, R., Pichon, F., & Carabine, E. (2015). Psychological resilience. London: Overseas Development Institute. 
Ha Anh, H., Da Hanh, T. M., Thi Tuong Vi, N., & Shunbo, Y. (2018). Examining the interaction of flood 
vulnerability determinants in Cambodia and Vietnam using partial least squ ares structural equation 
modelling. Water Policy, 20(6), 1256-1278. 
Hallegatte, S., Bangalore, M., & Vogt -Schilb, A. (2016). Assessing socioeconomic resilience to floods in 90 
countries. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (7663). 
He, Z., & Zhai, G. (2015). Spatial effect on public risk perception of natural disaster: a comparative study in East 
Asia. Journal of Risk Analysis and Crisis Response, 5(3), 161-168. 
Hudson, P., Botzen, W. W., & Aerts, J. C. (2019). Flood insurance arrangements in the European Union for future 
flood risk under climate and socioeconomic change. Global environmental change, 58, 101966. 
Hudson, P., Botzen, W. W., Feyen, L., & Aerts, J. C. (2016). Incentivising flood risk adaptation through risk based 
insurance premiums: Trade-offs between affordability and risk reduction. Ecological Economics, 125, 1-13. 
Jones, L., & Tanner, T. (2017). ‘Subjective resilience’: using perceptions to quantify household resilience to 
climate extremes and disasters. Regional Environmental Change, 17(1), 229-243. 
Kamal, A. M., Shamsudduha, M., Ahmed, B., Hassan, S. K., Islam, M. S., Kelman, I., & Fordham, M. (2018). 
Resilience to flash floods in wetland communities of northeastern Bangladesh.  International journal of 
disaster risk reduction, 31, 478-488.  
Khalili, S., Harre, M., & Morley, P. (2015). A temporal framework of social resilience indicators of communities 
to flood, case studies: Wagga wagga and Kempsey, NSW, Australia.  International journal of disaster risk 
reduction, 13, 248-254. 
Khoja, L., Schubert, R., & Joerin, J. (2020). Social Resilience Indicators for Disaster Related Contexts.  
Khunwishit, S., Choosuk, C., & Webb, G. (2018). Flood resilience building in Thailand: Assessing progress and 
the effect of leadership. International Journal of Disaster Risk Science, 9(1), 44-54. 

[[PAGE 17]]
Koks, E. E., Jongman, B., Husby, T. G., & Botzen, W. J. (2015). Combining hazard, exposure and social 
vulnerability to provide lessons for flood risk management. Environmental science & policy, 47, 42-52. 
Koliou, M., van de Lindt, J. W., McAllister, T. P., Ellingwood, B. R., Dillard, M., & Cutler, H. (2020). State of 
the research in community resilience: Progress and challenges. Sustainable and resilient infrastructure, 5(3), 
131-151. 
Kuhlicke, C., Seebauer, S., Hudson, P., Begg, C., Bubeck, P., Dittmer, C., ...& Masson, T. (2020). The behavioral 
turn in flood risk management, its assumptions and potential implications. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Water, 7(3), e14 
Laurien, F., & Keating, A. (2019). Evidence from measuring community flood resilience in Asia.  Asian 
Development Bank Economics Working Paper Series, (595).18.  
Lazrus, H. (2015). Risk perception and climate adaptation in Tuvalu: A combined cultural theory and traditional 
knowledge approach. Human organization, 52-61. 
Lechowska, E. (2018). What determines flood risk perception? A review of factors of flood risk perception and 
relations between its basic elements. Natural Hazards, 94(3), 1341-1366. 
Liddell, J., & Ferreira, R. J. (2019 ). Predictors of individual resilience characteristics among individuals ages 65 
and older in post-disaster settings. Disaster medicine and public health preparedness, 13(2), 256-264. 
Liu, D., Li, Y., Shen, X., Xie, Y., & Zhang, Y. (2018). Flood risk perce ption of rural households in western 
mountainous regions of Henan Province, China.  International journal of disaster risk reduction,  27, 155-
160. 
Lo, A. Y., & Chan, F. (2017). Preparing for flooding in England and Wales: the role of risk perception and the  
social context in driving individual action. Natural hazards, 88(1), 367-387. 
Maidl, E., & Buchecker, M. (2015). Raising risk preparedness by flood risk communication.  Natural Hazards & 
Earth System Sciences, 15(7).  
McClymont, K., Morrison, D., Beevers, L., & Carmen, E. (2020). Flood resilience: a systematic review.  Journal 
of Environmental Planning and Management, 63(7), 1151-1176. 
McDowell, C. P., Andrade, L., O’Neill, E., O’Malley, K., O’Dwyer, J., & Hynds, P. D. (2020). Gender -related 
differences in flood risk perception and behaviours among private groundwater users in the Republic of 
Ireland. International journal of environmental research and public health,  17(6), 2072. 
McEwen, L., Garde- Hansen, J., Holmes, A., Jones, O., & Krause, F. (2017 ). Sustainable flood memories, lay 
knowledges and the development of community resilience to future flood risk.  Transactions of the Institute 
of British Geographers, 42(1), 14-28. 
Mees, H., Crabbé, A., & Driessen, P. P. (2017). Conditions for citizen co- production in a resilient, efficient and 
legitimate flood risk governance arrangement. A tentative framework.  Journal of Environmental Policy & 
Planning, 19(6), 827-842. 
Mees, H., Crabbé, A., Alexander, M., Kaufmann, M., Bruzzone, S., Lévy, L., & Lewandowski , J. (2016a). 
Coproducing flood risk management through citizen involvement: insights from cross -country comparison 
in Europe. Ecology and Society, 21(3). 
Mees, H., Tempels, B., Crabbé, A., & Boelens, L. (2016b). Shifting public -private responsibilities in  Flemish 
flood risk management. Towards a co-evolutionary approach. Land Use Policy, 57, 23-33. 
Moghadas, M., Asadzadeh, A., Vafeidis, A., Fekete, A., & Kötter, T. (2019). A multi -criteria approach for 
assessing urban flood resilience in Tehran, Iran. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 35, 101069. 
Morris, J. C., McNamara, M. W., & Belcher, A. (2019). Building resilience through collaboration between 
grassroots citizen groups and governments: two case studies.  Public Works Management & Policy , 24(1), 
50-62. 
Nakanishi, H., & Black, J. (2018). Implicit and explicit knowledge in flood evacuations with a case study of 
Takamatsu, Japan. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 28, 788-797. 
Nones, M. (2015). Implementation of the floods directive in selected EU member states. Water and Environment 
Journal, 29(3), 412-418. 
Ntontis, E., Drury, J., Amlôt, R., Rubin, G. J., & Williams, R. (2017). Emergent social identities in a flood: 
Implications for community psychosocial resilience. Journal of  Community & Applied Social Psychology, 
28(1), 3–14. doi:10.1002/casp.2329  
Ntontis, E., Drury, J., Amlôt, R., Rubin, G. J., & Williams, R. (2019). Community resilience and flooding in UK 
guidance: A critical review of concepts, definitions, and their impl ications. Journal of Contingencies and 
Crisis Management, 27(1), 2-13. 

[[PAGE 18]]
O'Grady, M. J., Evans, B., Eigbogba, S., Muldoon, C., Campbell, A. G., Brewer, P. A., & O'Hare, G. M. (2019). 
Supporting participative pre -flood risk reduction in a UNESCO biosphere.  Journal of Flood Risk 
Management, 12(S2), e12520. 
O'Neill, E., Brereton, F., Shahumyan, H., & Clinch, J. P. (2016). The impact of perceived flood exposure on flood 
risk perception: The role of distance. Risk Analysis, 36(11), 2158-2186. 
Papagiannaki, K., Kotroni, V., Lagouvardos, K., & Papagiannakis, G. (2019). How awareness and confidence 
affect flood -risk precautionary behavior of Greek citizens: The role of perceptual and emotional 
mechanisms. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 19(7), 1329-1346. 
Peng, L., Tan, J., Lin, L., & Xu, D. (2019). Understanding sustainable disaster mitigation of stakeholder 
engagement: Risk perception, trust in public institutions, and disaster insurance.  Sustainable 
Development, 27(5), 885-897.  
Qasim, S., Khan, A. N., Shrestha, R. P., & Qasim, M. (2015). Risk perception of the people in the flood prone 
Khyber Pukhthunkhwa province of Pakistan. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 14, 373-378.   
Qasim, S., Qasim, M., Shrestha, R. P., Khan, A. N., Tun, K., & Ashraf, M. (2016). Community resilience to flood 
hazards in Khyber Pukhthunkhwa province of Pakistan.  International Journal of Disaster Risk 
Reduction, 18, 100-106.  
Quinn, T., Bousquet, F., Guerbois, C., Sougrati, E., & Tabutaud, M. (2018).The dynamic relationship between 
sense of place and risk perception in landscapes of mobility. Ecology and Society, 23(2). 
Rana, I. A., Jamshed, A., Younas, Z. I., & Bhatti, S. S. (2020). Characterizing flood risk perception in urban 
communities of Pakistan. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 46, 101624. 
Räsänen, A., Kauppinen, V., Juhola, S., Setten, G., & Lein, H. (2020). Configurations of community in flood risk 
management. Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift-Norwegian Journal of Geography, 1-16. 
Reyes, D. D., & Lu, J. L. (2016). Gender dimension in disaster situations: A case study of flood prone women in 
Malabon City, Metro Manila. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 15, 162-168. 
Ridolfi, E., Albrecht, F., & Di Baldassarre, G. (2020). Exploring the role of risk perception in influencing flood 
losses over time. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 65(1), 12-20. 
Rufat, S., Tate, E., Burton, C. G., & Maroof, A. S. (2015). Social vulnerability to floods: Review of case studies 
and implications for measurement. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 14, 470-486 
Saja, A. A., Goonetilleke, A., Teo, M., & Ziyath, A. M. (2019). A critical review of social resilience assessment 
frameworks in disaster management. International journal of disaster risk reduction, 35, 101096. 
Salvati, P., Petrucci, O., Rossi, M., Bianchi, C., Pasqua, A. A., & Guzzetti, F. (2018). Gender, age and 
circumstances analysis of flood and landslide fatalities in Italy.  Science of the total environ ment, 610, 867-
879. 
Santoro, S., Pluchinotta, I., Pagano, A., Pengal, P., Cokan, B., & Giordano, R. (2019). Assessing stakeholders' 
risk perception to promote Nature Based Solutions as flood protection strategies: The case of the Glinščica 
river (Slovenia). Science of the total environment, 655, 188-201. 
Saulnier, D. D., Hanson, C., Ir, P., Mölsted Alvesson, H., & Von Schreeb, J. (2018). The effect of seasonal floods 
on health: analysis of six years of national health data and flood maps. International journal of environmental 
research and public health, 15(4), 665. 
Scherzer, S., Lujala, P., & Rød, J. K. (2019). A community resilience index for Norway: An adaptation of the 
Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities (BRIC).  International Journal of Disaster Risk 
Reduction, 36, 101107. 
Seebauer, S., & Babcicky, P. (2018). Trust and the communication of flood risks: comparing the roles of local 
governments, volunteers in emergency services, and neighbours. Journal of Flood Risk Management, 11(3), 
305-316. 
Seebauer, S., & Babcicky, P. (2020). The Sources of Belief in Personal Capability: Antecedents of Self‐Efficacy 
in Private Adaptation to Flood Risk. Risk analysis, 40(10), 1967-1982. 
Shah, A. A., Ye, J., Abid, M., Khan, J., & Amir, S. M. (2018). Flood hazards: household vulnerability and 
resilience in disaster -prone districts of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, Pakistan.  Natural hazards , 93(1), 
147-165. 
Shao, W., Xian, S., Lin, N., Kunreuther, H., Jackson, N., & Goidel, K. (2017). Understanding the effects of past 
flood events and perceived and estimated flood risks on individuals' voluntary flood insurance purchase 
behavior. Water research, 108, 391-400. 
Soetanto, R., Mullins, A., & Achour, N. (2017). The perceptions of social responsibility for community resilience 
to flooding: the impact of past experience, age, gender and ethnicity. Natural Hazards, 86(3), 1105 –1126. 

[[PAGE 19]]
Stedman, R. C. (2016). Subjectivity and social -ecological systems: a rigidity trap (and sense of place as a way 
out). Sustainability Science, 11(6), 891-901. 
Surminski, S., & Eldridge, J. (2017). Flood insurance in England–an assessment of the current and newly proposed 
insurance scheme in the context of rising flood risk. Journal of Flood Risk Management, 10(4), 415-435. 
Thistlethwaite, J., H enstra, D., Brown, C., & Scott, D. (2018). How flood experience and risk perception  
influences protective actions and behaviours among Canadian homeowners.  Environmental 
management, 61(2), 197-208. 
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction 2015–2030. 
Преузтето 4. априла 2020. са http://www.unisdr.org/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf)  
Van Valkengoed, A. M., & Steg, L. (2019). Meta -analyses of factors motivating climate change adaptation 
behaviour. Nature Climate Change, 9(2), 158-163. 
Verbrugge, L., & van den Born, R. (2018). The role of place attachment in public perceptions of a re-landscaping 
intervention in the river Waal (The Netherlands). Landscape and urban planning, 177, 241-250. 
Wang, Z., Wang, H., Huang, J., Kang, J., & Han, D. (2018). Analysis of the public flood risk perception in a 
flood-prone city: The case of Jingdezhen city in China. Water, 10(11), 1577. 
Wickes, R., Zahnow, R., Taylor, M., & Piquero, A. R. (2015). Neighborhood str ucture, social capital, and 
community resilience: Longitudinal evidence from the 2011 Brisbane flood disaster.  Social Science 
Quarterly, 96(2), 330-353. 
Yawson, D. O., Adu, M. O., Armah, F. A., Kusi, J., Ansah, I. G., & Chiroro, C. (2015). A needs -based approach 
for exploring vulnerability and response to disaster risk in rural communities in low income countries.  
 
Funding: This research was funded by European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under 
Grant Agreement No. 740750. 
 
 