[[PAGE 1]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
Available online 2 March 2021
2468-3124/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Tailored flood risk management: Accounting for socio-economic and 
cultural differences when designing strategies 
Frans Klijn
a , b , *
, Marcel Marchand
a
, Karen Meijer
a
, Herman van der Most
a
, Dana Stuparu
a 
a
Deltares, PO Box 177, NL2600MH Delft, The Netherlands 
b
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Flood risk management 
Cultural theory 
Planning 
Development funding 
ABSTRACT  
Climate change and socio-economic development result in increasing flood risk which challenges flood risk 
management policy making and practice. Each situation, however, is different and calls for not only under -
standing the natural context, but also the socio-economic and cultural context. Only then Flood Risk Manage -
ment strategies can be designed that are not only 1) fit for purpose but also 2) feasible for local implementation 
and 3) sustainable into the future. Flood consequences that are accepted in some cultures (fatalist), may not be 
acceptable in other cultures (controlist). This calls for considering the local normative context in order to un -
derstand current differences in policy and practice. More importantly, the design of strategic alternatives for 
Flood Risk Management into the future should consider this socio-economic and cultural context as well because 
not every society aims for the same goals in the same proportion, nor is equally willing or capable to implement 
and maintain sophisticated infrastructure and dedicated institutions. Based on literature on cultural theory and 
national cultures, we hypothesized that acknowledging socio-economic and cultural differences would allow to 
better appreciate the rationale of current flood risk management policies and practices in different parts of the 
world. By analysing cases related to Deltares projects abroad, we explored whether these factors explain the main 
differences observed. Based on this preliminary exploration, we propose a shortlist of factors to consider when 
designing future flood risk management strategies tailored to local socio-economic and cultural contexts.   
1. The setting 
Flood risk management is one of many means to achieve sustainable 
development, and not a goal in itself. Reducing risks is quintessential to 
support socio-economic development, because recovering from disasters 
costs lots of money and effort which cannot be spent on development (cf. 
OECD, 2019 ). It is noted that some flood-prone countries, like 
Bangladesh or Mozambique, are perhaps trapped in a vicious cycle of 
recurrent disasters and only partial recovery, slowing down their 
development. This notion lies behind the policy of international 
agencies like the World Bank or Asian Development Bank, who support 
flood risk management projects and capacity building in view of 
enhancing economic development. In contrast, implementing and 
maintaining a preventative flood risk management strategy also costs 
substantial amounts of money and effort and hence requires a certain 
degree of development. 
Flood risk management can thus be considered a balancing act in 
which the costs of designing, implementing and sustaining a strategy 
should be proportional to the benefits of having the strategy in terms of 
reduced risks ( Van der Most et al., 2014; Kind, 2014 ) and hence 
development potential. This is the simple, utilitarian perspective (cf. 
Eijgenraam et al., 2017 ). It gives preference to designing strategies that 
are fit for purpose, in the sense that they achieve the largest reduction of 
risk against the least costs. But strategies and interventions that have 
proved successful in one country, may fail to be so when transferred to 
another country, often because they are insufficiently suited to the local 
socio-economic situation or the cultural setting. 
Increasingly, developing countries complain about the many plans, 
drafted by foreign consultants that do not come with the required 
funding or call for huge loans, or that are otherwise unsuited for local 
implementation. From the perspective of the consultants, it is frustrating 
to see that projects that have been proposed are not implemented or not 
being adequately used or maintained, or simply not finalized and hence 
not effective ( Minkman et al., 2019 ). To our opinion, both frustrations 
call for another approach to the design of flood risk management stra -
tegies, which we call tailored flood risk management in the sense that 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: frans.klijn@deltares.nl (F. Klijn).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Water Security 
journal homepag e: www.scien cedirect.co m/journal/ water-secur ity 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasec.2021.100084 
Received 1 September 2020; Received in revised form 8 February 2021; Accepted 16 February 2021   

[[PAGE 2]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
2
they should not only be  
1) fit for purpose, but they should also be  
2) feasible for local implementation and  
3) sustainable into the future. 
Tailored flood risk management requires an understanding of not 
only the risk situation, but also of the local policy context. An analysis 
and assessment of the risk situation is already commonplace, as defined 
by hazard, vulnerability and the intersect of these, exposure ( FLOODsite, 
2009b; Klijn et al., 2015 ). Or in other terms: the physiographic setting, 
the existing flood management infrastructure and the people and their 
assets at stake. Such an analysis and assessment of risk increasingly not 
only considers current flood risk, but also the development of flood risk 
into the future, as physical developments, e.g. climate change and 
subsidence, as well as socio-economic developments, e.g. demographic 
and economic developments, cause a steady increase. As WMO et al. 
(2017) state: ‘ ’ Development of a well-balanced strategy … should start with 
a proper understanding of the flood risk. Not only examining the character -
istics of past floods but also looking into possible future situations . ’ And also: 
’ Effective measures for reducing flood risk will be location-specific, there is no 
single solution for all flood problems; a variety of measures (a strategy) will 
be required to reduce flood risk to a societally agreed upon, acceptable level. ’ 
These views were also expressed in the ‘Ten golden rules to guide a 
sound approach for strategic flood management ’ by Sayers et al. (2015) , 
for example in rules 4 (‘ Recognize that the future will be different from the 
past. The world is changing . ’ ) and 10 (‘ The development of any strategy will 
therefore be location-specific … reflecting the specific risks that must be 
faced. ’ (sentence parts swapped by the authors). 
As evidenced by these examples, there is already quite some 
consensus and guidance about what should be done for a sound flood 
risk analysis and assessment, and how it should be done to be as 
instrumental as possible for the next stage. A sound policy analysis 
( Mayer, Van der Most & Bots, 2002 ) requires that the flood risk 
assessment is followed by the design of strategic alternatives, as well as 
their full assessment, and culminating in the definition of a preferred 
strategy. In this context, a flood risk management strategy can be 
defined by its content, i.e. as a comprehensive set of physical in -
terventions and policy instruments (cf. FLOODsite, 2009; Marchand 
et al., 2012; WMO, 2017 ). But a strategy is usually also understood as 
implying a process of implementation and maintenance, thus 
comprising an institutional governance structure and funding 
arrangements. 
As for the content of alternative strategies, their fitness for purpose is 
usually assessed by evaluating their effectiveness and efficiency, as well 
as all relevant side-effects on society, economy, and ecology (cf. 
FLOODsite, 2009 ). This relates to the three main objective domains of 
sustainable development (people, prosperity and planet), so including 
social equity and environmental issues as currently captured by the term 
‘inclusive green growth ’ . Nowadays, one might also refer to the widely 
endorsed Sustainable Development Goals ( UN, 2015 ). We might there -
fore conclude that designing or selecting a strategy that is fit for purpose 
is already sufficiently sustained by appropriate assessment methods, 
whether societal cost-benefit analysis, ecosystem-service-based assess -
ment or multi-criteria analysis. 
But what about assessing the feasibility for implementation and 
sustainability into the future? As for the first, a partial — and hence 
limited — assessment of technical feasibility is often applied, or simply 
expert judgement. Whether a strategy really fits in certain socio- 
economic and cultural settings, may require a more thorough analysis, 
however. And as for the second, the sustainability into the future, this is 
of course partly covered by looking into long-term and off-site side-ef -
fects of interventions and policy instruments, but usually does not cover 
an assessment of the sustainability of operation and maintenance, which 
so often causes a strategy to not remain effective. Indeed, it is sustained 
governance we need to consider as well. 
Regarding the governance of flood risk management, OECD recently 
issued a report titled Applying the OECD Principles on Water Governance to 
Floods ( OECD, 2019 ), in which 11 principles for good water governance 
( OECD, 2015 ) were specified to flood (risk) management. Literally, it is 
stated that ‘ The OECD Principles on Water Governance are developed on the 
premise that there is no one-size-fits-all solution to water challenges world -
wide, … . They recognize that governance is highly contextual, that water 
policies need to be tailored to different water resources and places, … ’ . 
Whereas the need for tailoring is acknowledged, the actual principles are 
quite prescriptive and formulated from the perspective of the OECD 
members, i.e. developed countries. Whether they apply equally well 
elsewhere is yet to be seen. 
In this paper, we therefore adopt a more analytical, investigative 
perspective, and first try to establish how a policy context co-defines 
current strategies as applied in different parts of the world. Our aim is 
therefore to not prescribe a certain approach too soon, but to rather 
sensitize technical specialists and consulting engineers who work or are 
going to work abroad. 
2. Research approach and set-up of this paper 
This paper firstly explores why different flood risk management 
strategies are being applied in different situations and in different parts 
of the world, and more specifically, to what extent socio-economic and 
cultural differences explain the differences in strategy relative to dif -
ferences in the physical risk situation. Secondly, we aim to make rec -
ommendations on how to account for socio-economic and cultural 
differences in order to ensure that flood risk management strategies are 
not only fit for purpose but also feasible for implementation and sus -
tainable into the future; i.e. are truly tailored. 
To this end, we first delve shallowly into the literature on relevant 
socio-economic and cultural characteristics, as well as into common 
practice within the World Bank and similar institutions that support 
development planning, flood risk management projects and pro -
grammes, or Disaster Risk Reduction policies. From this literature 
search, we propose a shortlist of key socio-economic and cultural 
characteristics which we hypothesize should be considered when 
analyzing a certain risk management policy context. 
Next, we test our hypothesis by exploring a number of cases and 
comparing these to the Netherlands and Bangladesh as references. We 
selected 5 cases, spread over several continents and different cultures, 
based on the pragmatic criterion that we have been or are currently 
engaged in flood risk management policy planning and design ( Fig. 1 ). 
Our home country is our first reference case, for obvious reasons 
(though the Netherlands may be regarded distinctly off-average), and 
Bangladesh is the second as it is the most threatened delta in the world 
with the longest experience in living with floods (cf. Zevenbergen et al., 
2018 ) whilst socio-economically and culturally it is almost the opposite 
of the Netherlands, and hence an adequate counterpart. 
For each case we described the current flood risk management 
strategy and subsequently tried to establish to what extent the observed 
differences between them could be attributed to differences in the 
Fig. 1. The location of the 5 investigated cases and the Netherlands and 
Bangladesh as reference cases. 
F. Klijn et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[[PAGE 3]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
3
potentially explanatory socio-economic and cultural characteristics, 
using the proposed shortlist of relevant characteristics. 
Finally, we discuss our findings and try to translate our under -
standing into recommendations on how to proceed when designing a 
flood risk management strategy abroad. 
3. What literature says about relevant socio-economic and 
cultural characteristics 
Many countries have a distinct ’ flood risk management culture ’ , 
often related to their history (e.g. Bubeck et al., 2017 ). This constitutes 
what we may call the policy context. An analysis of the policy context 
therefore may help understand why certain flood risk management ap -
proaches and interventions have been chosen; i.e. in hindsight. To define 
a policy context, we may look at 1) the general socio-economic context 
in which a management policy and related institutional setting devel -
oped (e.g. Kaufman et al., 2010 ), and 2) the cultural/normative context. 
First, however, we want to emphasize that there are obvious differ -
ences in policy between well-established democracies and countries that 
have been more centrally and autocratically led for decades, centuries or 
ages. Both, however, have shown to be able to persist and both may have 
well-established institutions. And regardless of how a country is led or 
organized, managing flood risk can be a concern. It is important to 
realize that for flood risk management planning the state system is not 
something that can be easily changed or even influenced in behalf of a 
more desirable strategy and must be considered as a given. It is unde -
niably ’ context ’ . Still, we may desire to roughly qualify a particular 
country ’ s governance setting, which we may derive from the Worldwide 
Governance Indicators (WGI) ( Kaufman et al., 2010 ), for example those 
representing Rule of Law and Control of Corruption. 
The importance of the general socio-economic setting is especially 
stressed by the United Nations (UN), the OECD, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), and the World Bank (WB) and other donor in -
stitutions. This setting, or state of development, may also partly clarify a 
country ’ s priorities in flood risk management. There is, for example, a 
correlation between the degree of development of a country and the 
degree of protection that is being aimed for. In most developed countries 
protection levels of about 1: 100 to 1: 500 apply, related to the magni -
tude of the expected economic consequences of flooding, whereas in 
developing countries such levels are often regarded as unattainable. 
The general socio-economic context also relates to the availability of 
funding and willingness and capability to spend money on flood pro -
tection. Here we may thus recognize three other relevant characteristics, 
namely: 1) the degree of institutionalization, 2) the availability of 
money for investments in flood risk reduction, and 3) the education level 
of the population in general and of the responsible authorities and en -
gineers in particular. This is what we might call the institutional setting, 
related to the general socio-economic context. For a first estimate, the 
degree of institutionalization can also be derived from the already 
mentioned Worldwide Governance Indicators, in particular Government 
Effectiveness. Similarly, the availability of money for investments in 
flood risk management can be deduced from databases on Gross Do -
mestic Product, whether per country or per capita, or translated into per 
capita Purchasing Power Parity (PPP), as made available by the World 
Bank (WB) or the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The level of ed -
ucation in a country, finally, can be retrieved from the Human Devel -
opment Index of the United Nations (UN) or from a list of the OECD (see 
Wikipedia). The latter specifies the percentage of a country ’ s population 
that has received primary, secondary or tertiary education, but is limited 
to the OECD countries plus some other large countries only. The UN-HDI 
mapped all countries and translated the outcomes into a single index. 
With the databases on indices mentioned above, we might obtain 
quantitative information about many individual indicators of gover -
nance, economic development and human development and hence an 
adequate overview of a country ’ s or regions socio-economic develop -
ment status. This is relevant for the question how feasible expensive 
technical interventions requiring highly skilled personnel or computer -
ized operation, or complicated institutional arrangements would be in a 
certain policy setting. One might say: to cover the idea of ‘governance 
feasibility ’ . This does, however, not yet cover the cultural dimension. So, 
let us have a closer look at cultural differences next. 
In the 1980ies and 1990ies cultural differences have attained lots of 
interest in anthropology and sociology, usually to identify the most 
distinguishing factors in a multi-dimensional hyperspace of possibly 
relevant factors. From a wealth of empirical research, especially by 
groups around Thompson and Wildavsky (cf. Thompson et al., 1990 ) the 
factors ‘group ’ and ‘grid ’ emerged as being the most differentiating. The 
terms group and grid represent a) the degree of individualism versus 
collectivism and b) the degree of freedom of choice: prescribing (free) or 
prescribed (externally imposed restrictions on choice) ( Schwarz and 
Thompson, 1990 ). These two factors have proved quite useful as main 
axes in attempts to distinguish different cultures (e.g. Sun-ki Chai et al., 
2009 ). 
The two factors also proved useful in communicating ‘cultural the -
ory ’ (see Thompson, 2002 ) as they allowed the characterization of four 
distinct perspectives of the world: a hierarchist/controlist, an 
individualist/market-optimist, an egalitarian/environmental pessimist 
and a fatalist. In turn, these four perspectives helped to understand 
conflicting opinions on preferred policy directions, as they could be 
translated into 1) views on how the world functions and 2) preferred 
management styles (after Van Asselt et al., 2001 ; Fig. 2 ; cf. also Offer -
mans et al., 2013 ). 
Another possibility to characterize cultural contexts is by dimensions 
of national culture, as identified by Hofstede (2001 ); Hofstede et al. 
(2010 ). He proposes six dimensions of culture, viz. Collectivism- 
Individualism; Power Distance; Femininity-Masculinity; Uncertainty 
avoidance; Long-term orientation; and Indulgence. 
We consider Hofstede ’ s dimensions as more useful to understand the 
perceptions and behavior of individual people in a certain culture, than 
for characterizing a national or regional cultural setting. That is because 
the perspective of Hofstede ’ s dimensions is primarily psychological, 
rather than related to a country ’ s institutions and capacities to address 
public policy issues — although the same could be maintained about 
Thompson ’ s factors. Still, the perceptions and related behavior of most 
of the people are very relevant, as the majority of the people tend to 
determine tacit culture. 
One would expect that at least Collectivism-Individualism (e.g. 
Germany vs. USA) and Long-term Orientation (e.g. China vs. African 
countries) are relevant differentiating factors at national level. And, 
Fig. 2. From cultural theory distinct perspectives can be derived, representing 
different beliefs about how ecosystems behave and on how management should 
account for that (adapted from Schwarz & Thompson, 1990 , by successively 
Middelkoop et al., 2004; De Bruijn et al., 2008 and the present authors). 
F. Klijn et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[[PAGE 4]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
4
obviously, collectivism-individualism is very similar to Thompson ’ s 
interpretation of ‘group ’ whereas it has already been identified as partly 
explaining differences in flood risk management between e.g. the 
Netherland and the USA ( Bubeck et al., 2017 ). In contrast, we consider 
Feminity-Masculinity as not really relevant as it primarily describes 
whether it is accepted that a strong leader/institution enforces his/its 
will. But if interpreted in this sense, Power Distance is very similar, as it 
describes whether less strong parties accept that their power and in -
fluence is limited. On the other hand, it is not unlikely that some of 
Hofstede ’ s psychological dimensions are also already partly covered by 
what we above called ’ state system ’ and (dominant) ’ world view ’ , i.e. if 
we consider these as reflecting a country ’ s ‘culture ’ . This applies espe -
cially for Power Distance and Indulgence. 
4. Key socio-economic and cultural characteristics: A proposal 
From the above-mentioned literature (esp. Thompson and Hofstede) 
and practice (World Bank and OECD), we first derived a longlist of 
possibly relevant socio-economic and cultural characteristics. Next, we 
did some profound pruning in order to derive a homologous short-list of 
about 6 – 10 characteristics only. We achieved this by scrutiny of each 
characteristic, cross-comparison and in many cases simply by sound 
reasoning. We thus got rid of most redundancies and overlaps, and 
propose the following shortlist of 8 relevant socio-economic and cultural 
differentiating characteristics to characterize a policy context:  
• state system : varying from restrained to free and from top-down 
control to bottom-up self-organizing. Examples: centrally led/ 
strong leader (e.g. China, Russia); democratic decentralized and 
strongly institutionalized (Germany, Nordic countries); free market 
mechanism/capitalism (USA, UK);  
• institutions : presence of well-established organizations, rules and 
regulations to implement a policy and to maintain technical 
interventions; 
• funds : availability of or access to funding, for both the imple -
mentation of interventions as well as their management and 
maintenance;  
• skills : capacity to plan, design, build and maintain complex technical 
interventions;  
• orientation : (long-term vs. short term, uncertainty avoidance) in a 
long-term oriented culture, a basic notion is that preparing for the 
future is always needed, whereas a short-time oriented culture con -
siders the past to provide an adequate moral and practical compass; 
uncertainty avoidance refers to a society ’ s tolerance for uncertainty 
and ambiguity, and hence has to do with anxiety in the face of the 
unknown. It strongly corresponds to the difference between con -
trolism and fatalism, as reflected by support to institutionalization 
(rules and regulations, large role for authorities and experts) versus 
the opposite; 
• collectivism-individualism : the extent to which people trust au -
thorities and support public services, as opposed to fostering inde -
pendency and favouring private action;  
• degree of commitment : degree to which all relevant flood risk 
management actors (often primarily the responsible authorities) are 
committed to implement and sustain a certain strategy. Also 
including commitment to integration and co-operation;  
• public support : likelihood of support or opposition from stakeholders 
and NGO ’ s who may benefit or bear the burden of interventions and 
may feel unheard. 
Of these 8, the first is an unchangeable given which, although it 
cannot be changed, does constrain the freedom of choice of in -
terventions and especially policy instruments. The next three define the 
overall degree of development and its likely development into the 
future, which primarily constrains how institutionally complex a policy 
might be, and how technically sophisticated and expensive to implement 
and maintain technical interventions. The next two characteristics, 
orientation and collectivism-individualism are the most truly culturally- 
rooted differences. They reflect the main dimensions found in ‘cultural 
theory ’ and related empirical studies and wrap-together some of the 
cultural dimensions proposed by Hofstede. They further constrain the 
range of interventions and policy instruments that are feasible. Finally, 
the degree of commitment of the responsible authorities is added as 
stakeholders identified it as the key to successful implementation, 
whereas — the counterpart — public support by the stakeholders was 
considered the key to success by the responsible authorities (e.g. Klijn 
et al., 2013 ; see also Bogdan, 2019 ). 
Of all 8 factors, the last two may be the most easily accommodated in 
the course of designing a flood risk management strategy. It could 
therefore be questioned whether they should be part of the context 
analysis or part of the strategy development. For our current case study 
analysis, they are certainly relevant context. 
4.1. Operationalization: Preliminary indicators 
In order to be able to compare our 5 cases mutually and with our 
reference countries the Netherlands and Bangladesh, we operationalized 
our 8 proposed characteristics by using readily available indicators that 
allow adequate (semi-)quantification. Therefore, we used indicators that 
are available in databases covering all, or at least most, countries, as 
follows:  
• for the state system we used the World Bank ’ s governance indicators 
Rule of Law and Control of Corruption, which are closely correlated. 
The Rule of Law ‘ reflects perceptions of the extent to which agents have 
confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the 
quality of contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the 
courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence . ’ The indicator 
Control of Corruption ‘ reflects perceptions of the extent to which public 
power is exercised for private gain, … , as well as “ capture ” of the state by 
elites and private interests . ’ Both indicators are ranked as percentile, so 
ranging from 0 to 100, and as they proved strongly correlated, we 
simply calculated the mean.  
• For an indication of the adequacy of institutions we consider the 
Worldbank ’ s governance indicator Government Effectiveness an 
adequate representation. This ‘ reflects perceptions of the quality of 
public services, the quality of the civil service and the degree of its inde -
pendence from political pressures, the quality of policy formulation and 
implementation, and the credibility of the government ’ s commitment to 
such policies. ’ Despite its being limited to civil, i.e. public, services 
and hence not covering possible private institutions, we consider it a 
good indicator, as flood risk management is largely a matter of public 
policy making.  
• for funds we regard the gross domestic product (GDP at purchasing 
power parity: PPP) per capita a good indicator, i.e. the purchasing 
power parity value of all final goods and services produced within a 
country in a given year, divided by the average (or mid-year) pop -
ulation for the same year. This indicator takes into account the 
relative cost of living and the inflation rates of the countries. Wiki -
pedia gives a list of countries ranked by their PPP (International 
Monetary Fund, 2019), which we transformed to a measure from 0 to 
100.  
• For an mere first indication of skills we draw from the Human 
Development Index (HDI) of UNDP and the Global Innovation Index 
(GII) of Cornell University et al. (2019). The Human Development 
Index is partly based on an education index, but unfortunately also 
partly on GDP. The GII focuses on medical innovation, but its ranking 
is based on the presence of and relationships with science and 
technology clusters. Both rankings were transformed to a scale from 
0 to 100. Interestingly, it was found that the HDI scores much lower 
than the GII, which might reflect inequities. Still, we calculated their 
mean, as the ranking was quite similar. 
F. Klijn et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[[PAGE 5]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
5
• for orientation we use two of the cultural dimensions as recognized 
by Hofstede as indicators, namely Long Term Orientation and Un -
certainty Avoidance. Hofstede ’ s dimensions already range from 0 to 
100. As the correlation between the two was less than expected and 
resulted in different rankings, we kept their individual scores and 
distinguish orientation 1 and 2. 
• for collectivism-individualism we can directly use Hofstede ’ s quan -
tification for this dimension.  
• For the degree of commitment of the policy makers we have not 
found any worldwide database that might apply. On the other hand, 
the description of the Worldbank ’ s governance indicator for Gov -
ernment Effectiveness suggests that it includes ‘the credibility of the 
government ’ s commitment … . ’ (italics by us). As this indicator was 
already used for institutions (see above), we have not attempted to 
identify any other indicator for this (left out).  
• for public support we can use both Hofstede ’ s dimension Power 
Distance or the Worldbank ’ s governance indicator Voice and 
Accountability. As these are negatively correlated, we transformed 
Power Distance to Power Proximity, such that both indicators are 
positively correlated and represent an increasing degree of potential 
stakeholder involvement or participation. 
5. Case studies 
First, we described all the cases in terms of flood risk situation, 
governance arrangements and management strategy. The focus was on 
understanding the specific risk situation as well as its management. 
Next, we tried to identify whether the socio-economic and cultural 
setting explained the current management strategy or desired changes to 
it. 
5.1. Different physical risk contexts 
The 5 cases are quite different. Vancouver (British Columbia, Can -
ada) and the Vietnamese Mekong delta are both located in a delta, hence 
relatively flat and threatened by river floods as well as coastal storm 
surges. The Mekong delta, however, lies in a tropical monsoon climate, 
with extreme amounts of rainfall on the delta itself during the wet 
season, whereas Vancouver is primarily threatened by the Fraser River 
coming from the maritime west side of the Rocky Mountains. Calgary 
(Alberta, Canada) is also threatened by river floods originating in the 
Rocky Mountains, but it lies on the continental, i.e. dry, side of the 
mountains; the northern extensions of the Great Plains with a badland- 
like topography. The rivers here tend to rather lose water than grow 
during their flow to the east (Great Lakes). Miami and Fort Lauderdale 
(Florida, USA) is special in the sense that it is very low above sea level, 
and mainly composed of raised coral reefs and their weathering prod -
ucts: sandy beach ridges on calcareous rocks, all very permeable. This 
implies that groundwater levels rise and drop with the tides at sea. It also 
means that sea level rise influences the inland water levels almost pro -
portionally and uncontrollably. The coast is primarily threatened by 
hurricanes with huge amounts of rainfall, storm surges and huge waves. 
The Democratic Republic of S ˜ao Tom ´e and Príncipe (STP), finally, is an 
archipelago comprised of two main islands and several islets in the Gulf 
of Guinea (Afrika). Here, coastal communities are being threatened by 
swell waves and storm surges but they are also affected by runoff from 
the hills and pluvial flooding; the climate is tropical with average 
rainfall ranging up to 7,000 mm in the southeast. 
As for the exposure and vulnerability, we see large differences be -
tween the case study areas, partly related to their size. In S ˜ao Tom ´e and 
Príncipe (STP) the rural coastal communities at risk vary in size from 
270 to 3300 people, and mainly live from fisheries in timber houses that 
are usually raised a few meters above ground level, except for those 
closest to the beach — because of the high wind speeds there. Vancouver 
and Calgary instead are large cities of about 2.5 (i.e. metropolitan 
Vancouver) and 1.2 million inhabitants (town only) respectively, with 
business centres with high rise buildings (‘downtown ’ ). Calgary ’ s 
downtown is spatially confined and largely located on the alluvial fan of 
the Elbow River, at the confluence with the Bow River. This fact, and the 
development of parts of the floodplain of these rivers for urban sprawl, 
explains the large damage incurred during the 2013 flood: an about 1: 
100 per year probability flood that affected 8% of Calgary ’ s population 
and did 7 billion dollars of damage ( Fig. 3 a). Vancouver ’ s downtown, in 
contrast, lies mainly on elevated ground, but parts of larger Vancouver 
and adjacent towns are in embanked polders along the Fraser River or on 
the actual delta. 
Miami and Fort Lauderdale are almost fully built-up areas along 
Florida ’ s long coast ( Fig. 3 b), which is regarded the place to be for the 
better-off Americans during holidays (second homes) or after retire -
ment. This attracted a huge recreational industry with many hotels on 
the outer ridge. During heavy rainfall events or storms at sea the streets 
are very regularly but shallowly flooded; still regarded as a common 
nuisance rather than as life-threatening, except for the occasional hur -
ricane landfall when evacuation is required. Vietnams Mekong Delta is 
again totally different, in the sense that it is primarily agricultural, with 
settlements since ancient times on slightly higher beach ridges and river 
levees. Each year, the daily life of more than 2 million people is affected 
when about half the delta ’ s surface area is flooded. This ‘normal 
flooding ’ has been welcomed for ages as it supports the growing of rice 
( Fig. 3 d) and hence contributed to Vietnam being the second largest rice 
exporter in the world ( Marchandet al., 2012 ). It also explains why the 
people of the Mekong Delta are originally so well-adapted to flooding 
(Pham Cong Cuu, 2011). Recently, however, industrial development and 
accelerated urbanization increasingly take up space in the delta, espe -
cially near major cities such as Can Tho. Moreover, agriculture has 
intensified opting for artificially irrigated triple rice cultivation instead 
of traditional double rice. Consequently, the delta ’ s vulnerability to 
extreme flooding has increased. 
5.2. Different risk management strategies 
Adequately but briefly characterizing the flood risk management 
strategy of each case is difficult, if not impossible. As stated in the 
introduction, a flood risk management strategy can be defined by its 
content or also by its governance structure. In our analysis, we focused 
on the content only, implying an interpretation in terms of the physical 
interventions and policy instruments applied (cf. FLOODsite, 2009 ; 
ASCE, 2014; Marchand et al., 2012; WMO, 2017 ; cf. Fig. 4 ). 
Instead of presenting a systematic analysis of each case ’ s strategy 
here, we only give a brief characterization. This is obviously selective 
and hence biased, but a full description would require too much text (the 
case descriptions are available on request), whereas a list of each case ’ s 
interventions and instruments would, to our opinion, not yield an 
adequate overview of the complexity and historical development of the 
different management strategies either. 
Until the 2013 flood, neither the city of Calgary nor the province of 
Alberta had a clear risk management strategy. Since then, plans were 
drafted, which not only included an initiative to increase the protection 
level by flood mitigation and protection measures, but also included 
measures to reduce the vulnerability of people and objects, e.g. by 
making money available for buy-outs (relocate or rebuild) and by 
issuing a building code bulletin. That might be considered an indication 
of an underlying integrated view, although there does not appear to be 
one common and well-defined policy on preventative flood risk man -
agement, neither at local, provincial nor federal level. Instead, however, 
at all levels relevant elements of such a comprehensive strategy can be 
found, including a legal framework, dedicated departments in provincial 
ministries and the city, flood maps, warning systems, involvement of 
consulting engineers and well-established stakeholder groups (Water -
Smart Solutions Ltd, 2013). 
Vancouver , or rather the lower mainland of British Columbia, relies 
strongly on flood defences, but complemented by early warning, 
F. Klijn et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[[PAGE 6]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
6
floodplain regulation, and building resilience into communities. The 
embankments along the Fraser River and its tributaries in the Lower 
Mainland have been constructed between 1968 and 1995 by the federal- 
provincial Fraser River Flood Control Program. They were intended to 
withstand the flood of record (dating back as far as 1894) with 0.6 m of 
freeboard. The 1894 flood was previously assessed as a 1: 200 per year 
flood but is now considered to likely have been a 1: 500 per year flood. A 
1: 200 design flood applies for all areas along the Fraser river. Since 
2003, the responsibility for flood management and floodplain regulation 
was shifted from the province to local governments, although the 
province remains involved in the infrastructure through the Dike 
Maintenance Act. The provincial River Forecast Center provides infor -
mation on current water levels as well as 5- and 10-day predictions. 
Currently, the Fraser Basin Council, a non-profit organization 
comprising Federal, Provincial, Local and First Nations governments, 
considers an upgrade of the infrastructure in anticipation of sea-level 
rise and other climate-change related impacts, as well as an improve -
ment of the resilience of the communities. For the funding of major 
infrastructural projects, local governments can apply to the Disaster 
Mitigation and Adaptation Fund (DMAF), which was launched by the 
federal government. The funding of the risk assessments, flood mapping, 
mitigation planning and small-scale mitigation works comes from the 
National Disaster Mitigation Program Funding, also established by fed -
eral government (in 2015), but administered by the province of British 
Columbia. Interestingly, the municipality of Richmond, a city sur -
rounded by water from the Fraser River and the ocean, is the only taxing 
its citizens directly for flood protection. The extra funds are used to 
upgrade the flood defences and pumping stations. This municipality 
sticks out for its projects and taxation. 
Fort Lauderdale ’ s inhabitants primarily regard floods as a nuisance 
which comes with the location. The town has very few technical means 
to control the flood hazard, except raising its roads and other infra -
structure and flood-proofing or raising properties: a strategy of constant 
repair and building back better. It implies that for property owners 
buying insurance or accepting the recurrent losses is the only resort. As 
the majority of the area lies within the 100-year flood zone, buying in -
surance is obliged by the Flood Disaster Protection Act which the US 
passed in 1973. It requires participation in the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency ’ s (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program 
(NFIP) ( FEMA, 2011 ). This calls for flood-proofing, has many exceptions 
from its policies, has a cap on its payments, and may ask very high rates 
in flood-prone areas; it hence favours the rich and excludes the poor. 
Still, it is not actuarily sound ( GAO, 2007; Penning-Rowsell & Priest, 
2014 ). 
Sao Tome and Principe have three ministries with responsibilities 
for elements of flood risk management, under supervision of a National 
Council for the Prevention and Response to Disasters (CONPREC; 
established in 2011) which is supported by UNDP. It does, however, not 
have a formal flood risk management policy, nor an official plan, legal 
framework or budget available for flood risk management. In practice, 
focus lies strongly on disaster prevention and response, with a strong 
emphasis on building societal resilience through individual measures. 
The strategy does involve the protection of key infrastructure, e.g. by 
floodwalls along coastal and riverine roads, but the main idea is to keep 
the people out of harm ’ s way, as the hazards are too intense to be 
controlled. Spatial planning is hence recognized as crucial but relocating 
land-owners from hazardous locations is found to be difficult; people 
said they were prepared to move, but not at their own costs. And not 
from locations with obvious advantages, such as the coast (for fisher -
men) or valleys (for farmers), to less favourable locations. Consequently, 
common practice is still that property owners (need to) take their own 
measures, mainly by building on stilts or on a concrete basement of 
sufficient height; the height not being prescribed but established locally 
by experience. 
Because of regional differences in physiography Vietnam defined 
strategies for flood disaster mitigation and management for three 
distinct geographic areas ( Van Staveren, 2007 ). For southern Vietnam 
the strategy reads: Living with floods and creating sustainable 
Fig. 3. (a). Calgary with Bow River during the 2013 flood. (b). Fort Lauderdale: proximity of water a key amenity. (c). S ˜ao Tom ´e and Príncipe: fishery communities 
located on exposed shores. (d). Vietnam: floods a crucial geo-ecosystem service. 
F. Klijn et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[[PAGE 7]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
7
development. Historically, there was no rationale for full flood control in 
the Mekong Delta and people lived with floods for centuries. Since the 
end of the war in 1975, this strategy has gradually been changed and the 
flood defence infrastructure has been extended to protect the growing 
cities and in behalf of agricultural intensification ( Van Staveren et al., 
2018 ). This strategy has been reinforced by MARD Decision 101/QD- 
BNN-TT 2015 on the Master Plan on Rice Production in the Autumn- 
winter Season in the Mekong Delta to 2020 with an outlook to 2030 . 
Consequently, the ancient system of low ‘August dikes ’ which left room 
for high floods (Thanh et al., 2019), is now systematically being replaced 
by high flood defences, which completely prevent the annual floods 
(UNDP, 2017). This policy change is sometimes attributed to the 
dominance of a ‘hydraulic bureaucracy ’ (Evers & Benedikter, 2009), 
with intricate linkages between government and the hydraulic con -
struction sector and an intuitive preference for modern technology. This 
policy has, however, also stirred significant criticism because of the risk 
shifts it comes with. For the heightening of the embankments results in 
higher flood levels elsewhere ( K ¨ak ¨onen, 2008 ), affecting cities like Can 
Tho, but especially rural areas. Moreover, the perceived better flood 
protection induces the so-called levee effect ( White, 1945 ) of investing 
in protected areas and thus increasing the vulnerability to flooding 
( K ¨ak ¨onen, 2008 ). In the Mekong Delta Plan (MDP, 2013), which was 
endorsed by Vietnam ’ s government as well as Development Partners in 
December 2013, a shift in mindset emerged resulting in the adoption in 
Parliament in 2017 of several guiding principles for flood risk man -
agement, including: “ to respect natural law and practical conditions, avoid 
violently interfering in the nature; select models of nature-based adaptation, 
environmentally sound, and sustainable development, on the basis of actively 
living with flood, brackish and salt water ” . 
Despite all the differences, common to all cases was that the strate -
gies were all quite comprehensive in the sense that combinations of 
many different measures and policy instruments were applied in which 
many actors were involved; and that the strategies had all constantly 
been adapted in response to experience in recent events, fashion and 
changing insights. 
6. Results: The cases compared by indicators for the key socio- 
economic and cultural characteristics 
Fig. 5 shows how the cases score on the 8 differentiating character -
istics we proposed. The most obvious difference is that between the most 
developed countries and the least developed countries, especially on the 
first four characteristics. Canada and the US very much resemble the 
Netherlands as for state system (Rule of Law, Control of Corruption), 
institutions (Government Effectiveness), funds (GDP (PPP) per capita), 
and skills (Human Development Index and Global Innovation Index). 
Regarding these characteristics Vietnam takes an intermediate position, 
with a relatively high score for skills thanks to a high Innovation Index. 
When we look at the 4 characteristics that rather reflect the cultural 
setting than the socio-economic context, there are remarkable 
Fig. 4. Checklist of flood risk management interventions, allowing an analysis 
of strategies in different cases (freely adapted and re-ordered after De Bruijn 
et al., 2008 and FLOODsite, 2009). Nature-based interventions are shaded 
green and structural engineering interventions grey; intermediate greenish; and 
those without evident physical consequence not shaded. (For interpretation of 
the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web 
version of this article.) 
Fig. 5. Scores for the indicators for the 6 countries (2 of the 5 cases are in 
Canada; with Netherlands and Bangladesh as references). 
F. Klijn et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[[PAGE 8]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
8
differences as well as unexpected similarities. For example, the rela -
tively long-term orientation of the Netherlands is almost equaled by 
Vietnam, which also develops a delta plan for its Mekong delta; the 
degree of uncertainty avoidance (Orientation 2) of the three richest 
countries is exceeded by Bangladesh and equaled by that of Sao Tome 
and Principe; and the expected largest degree of Individualism of the US 
is counterbalanced by higher scores for Public Support to government 
institutions in Canada and the Netherlands. 
7. Discloser statement 
Given his role as Guest Editor, Dr. Frans Klijn had no involvement in 
the peer-review of this article and has no access to information regarding 
its peer-review. Full responsibility for the editorial process for this 
article was delegated to Dr. Michel Lang. 
8. Is there any explanatory value in the identified socio- 
economic and cultural characteristics? 
The characteristics related to socio-economic development, i.e. in -
stitutions, funds and skills, might explain a preference for highly tech -
nical and expensive structural interventions in the rich developed 
countries versus more local and low-cost interventions in the other 
cases. However, this difference proved not so marked in practice. This 
may be explained by the fact that the physical setting of the cases is so 
different, whilst also the risk level and the acceptance of risk differs. 
Vietnam’s Mekong delta of course heavily relies on sound flood risk 
management for ages already, whereas Calgary has hardly any history of 
recent flooding and can easily recover from a flood, as evidenced by the 
aftermath of the 2013 flood. And Fort Lauderdale is located in such a 
disadvantageous physiographic setting that structural flood defence 
measures are bound to fail anyway. Also notable is that for the Vietnam 
case it was found that a strong lobby has been actively arguing for 
technical flood protection, whilst funding agencies also prefer to invest 
in structural measures, even when from a local and cultural perspective 
these are perhaps not the most preferable (cf. also Minkman, 2021). 
As to the acceptance of risk, it is remarkable that the score for Un -
certainty Avoidance (Orientation certainty) in Canada and the US is not 
much lower than that in the Netherlands; the score for long-termism 
(Orientation long-term) is, however, quite different. This could 
explain the relatively late development of comprehensive flood risk 
management policies in Canada and the US, although both countries 
seem to be increasingly aware of the need to respond to a changing 
climate and rising sea level. For the US case this is even essential for its 
chances of survival. At the same time, the US’s preference for individual 
action is only marginally reflected by a different score on Individualism 
in comparison to Canada and the Netherlands. Perhaps this indicator 
does not so much reflect preferences about interventions as expected. 
Vietnam’s long-term orientation may be either considered a reflec -
tion of its dependency on sound flood risk management, or as an 
explanation for its policy. Here the question arises whether culture is 
partly the result of a physical setting, or whether culture explains how 
natural risk is perceived and hence the approach to flood risk manage -
ment. Similarly, the short-termism of Sao Tome and Principe can equally 
be attributed to the still low socio-economic status of this young de -
mocracy, or alternatively be considered the explanation of an apparent 
acceptance of living with risk of the communities along the coast, which 
largely depend on fisheries and hence have no other option than to settle 
in hazardous places. 
Where Vietnam and Sao Tome deviate strongly on long-term orien -
tation, they also do on Public Support (Voice and Accountability), which 
would indicate that the Vietnamese people are being ruled rather than 
intensely participate in policy making, whereas the opposite seems true 
for Sao Tome. In Vietnam we indeed see that embankments are being 
installed or raised, even when the farmers prefer their rice fields to be 
flooded or where they suffer from the increased flood levels in the river 
as its discharge capacity is being reduced. It seems, thus, that not all 
stakeholders are being heard, certainly not those off-site but often not 
even those on-site. 
All in all, we must admit that the characteristics we defined and the 
available indicators we used to qualify the socio-economic and cultural 
setting of each case proved less of an explanation of the current flood 
risk management policy than we expected. We already mentioned that 
the physical risk situation may be so important that the influence of 
stage of development and culture may be too small to be noticeable, 
especially also due to the limited number and large variety of cases we 
investigated, each with comprehensive but also complex policies (but cf. 
Noll et al., 2020, who looked at one type of intervention only). Even 
more importantly, the in-depth descriptions of the cases showed that 
each case has a special history which is so rich that only by a very 
thorough investigation one can obtain sufficient insight in the possible 
why of (elements of) the current flood risk management strategy. 
9. Findings and discussion 
We argued that each flood risk situation calls for the design of a flood 
risk management policy tailored to the specific setting. We stated that 
not only the physical context and risk situation are relevant for the 
design of such a policy, but also the socio-economic and cultural context. 
We hypothesized that if that be true, we ought to be able to detect dif -
ferences between current flood risk management policies between 
different cases, which could be explained by a characterization of this 
context. We then identified key characteristics to describe the socio- 
economic and cultural setting and selected indicators by which our 
cases could be compared. 
We found that the policies in the cases show large differences, but 
that our presumed differentiating characteristics only explain these 
differences to a small extent. Perhaps the physical conditions are much 
more important than previously envisaged, or the number of cases is 
simply too small and their variety too large. Or our hypothesis is 
mistaken, which we rather not admit yet. After all, the World Bank and 
other funding agencies as well as OECD see a clear relationship between 
degree of development and being able to adequately manage flood risk. 
Whether this relationship is one way or the other, or both ways, is 
however yet to be seen; does development depend on sound (flood) risk 
management, or is it a prerequisite for well-established institutions, 
sufficient funding and the good skills that are needed to implement a 
comprehensive and effective flood risk management policy and its 
related interventions? 
As for the experience with the 8 socio-economic and cultural char -
acteristics we proposed, as well as with the globally available indicators, 
we still recommend anybody who is going to work abroad to have a look 
at them, just as a first acquaintance. Further, a sensitive and open atti -
tude to the culture one is going to work in seems the best recommen -
dation; not in order to simply accept or adopt its peculiarities, but to 
prevent an insufficiently humble attitude as to the local cultural setting 
which might result in ineffective advice on what to do or how to do it. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
References 
E.A. Bogdan, Perceptions and practices of flood risk management: a case study of flood 
risk governance in High River, Alberta, University of Alberta, 2019. PhD thesis. 
P. Bubeck, H. Kreibich, E. Penning-Rowsell, W. Botzen, H. de Moel, F. Klijn, Explaining 
differences in flood management approaches in Europe and the USA – a comparative 
analysis, J. Flood Risk Manage. 10 (2017) (2017) 436–445, https://doi.org/ 
10.1111/jfr3.12151. 
F. Klijn et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

[[PAGE 9]]
Water Security 12 (2021) 100084
9
De Bruijn, K.M., F. Klijn, C. McGahey, M. Mens & H. Wolfert (2008). Long-term strategies 
for flood risk management: scenario definition and strategic alternative design. 
FLOODsite report T14-08-01 (www.floodsite.net). 
C. Eijgenraam, R. Brekelmans, D. den Hertog, K. Roos, Optimal strategies for flood 
prevention, Manage. Sci. 63 (5) (2017) 1644 – 1656, https://doi.org/10.1287/ 
mnsc.2015.2395 . 
FEMA (2011). National Flood Insurance Program: Frequently asked questions, repetitive 
loss. (http://www.fema.gov/txt/rebuild/repetitive_loss_faqs.tx). 
FLOODsite (2009). Flood risk assessment and flood risk management. An introduction 
and guidance based on experiences and findings of FLOODsite (an EU-funded 
Integrated Project). Deltares | Delft Hydraulics, Delft, the Netherlands, ISBN 978 90 
814067 1 0. E-publication www.floodsite.net, 140 pp. 
FLOODsite (2009b). Language of risk. Project definitions. 2nd ed. Report T32-04-01, 
www.floodsite.net. 
GAO (US Government Accountability Office) (2007). National Flood Insurance Program. 
FEMA ’ s Management and Oversight of Payments for Insurance Company Services 
Should be Improved. GAO-07-1078. Washington. 
G. Hofstede, Culture ’ s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions, and 
Organizations Across Nations, Second Edition, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks 
CA, 2001 . 
G. Hofstede, G.J. Hofstede, M. Minkov, Cultures and Organizations: Software of the 
Mind. Revised and Expanded, 3rd Edition., McGraw-Hill, 2010 . 
Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay & M. Mastruzzi (2010). The Worldwide Governance Indicators: 
A Summary of Methodology, Data and Analytical Issues. World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper No. 5430, Washington. 
M. K ¨ak ¨onen, Mekong delta at the crossroads: more control or adaptation? AMBIO: J. 
Human Environ. 37 (3) (2008) 205 – 212 . 
F. Klijn, D. de Bruin, M. de Hoog, S. Jansen, D. Sijmons, Design quality of Room-for-the- 
River measures in the Netherlands: role and assessment of the Quality Team (Q- 
team), Journal of River Basin Management 11 (2013) 287 – 299, https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/15715124.2013.811418 . 
Klijn, F., H. Kreibich, H. de Moel & E. Penning-Rowsell (2015). Adaptive Flood Risk 
Management Planning based on a Comprehensive Flood Risk Conceptualisation. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies to Global Change (MITI) 20(2015)/6: 845-864, 
DOI: 10.1007/s11027-015-9638-z. 
J.M. Kind, Economically efficient flood protection standards for The Netherlands, 
J. Flood Risk Manage. 7 (2014) 103 – 117 . 
Marchand, M., Trinh Thi Long & Sawarendro (2012). Adaptive Water Management for 
Delta Regions: Towards GREEN Water Defense in East Asia, Deltares-report 
1205471-000, Delft. 
Mayer, I., H. van der Most & P. Bots (2002). Dam the river or go with the flow? Changing 
views on policy analysis in Dutch water management. 24th APPAM conference, 
November 7-9, 2002, Dallas, Texas. 
H. Middelkoop, M.B.A. van Asselt, S.A. Klooster van ’ t, et al., Perspectives on flood 
management in the Rhine and Meuse rivers, River Research and Application 20 (3) 
(2004) 327 – 342, https://doi.org/10.1002/rra.782 . 
E. Minkman, P. Letitre, A. van Buuren, Reconstructing the impasse in the transfer of delta 
plans: evaluating the translation of Dutch water management strategies to Jakarta, 
Indonesia, J. Environ. Plann. Manage. 62 (9) (2019) 1562 – 1582, https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/09640568.2018.1527216 . 
E. Minkman, Building Bridges. Policy transfer and translation of the Dutch Delta 
Approach in South and Southeast Asia, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, 2021. PhD 
thesis . 
Noll, B. T. Filatova & A. Need (2020). How does culture affect individual adaptation to 
climate-driven floods? Proceedings of the FLOODrisk2020 conference, BME, 
Budapest. 
OECD, OECD Principles on Water Governance, OECD, Paris, 2015 . 
OECD (2019). Applying the OECD principles on water governance to floods: a checklist 
for action. OECD Studies on Water, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
A. Offermans, P. Valkering, H. Vreugdenhil, N. Wijermans, M. Haasnoot, The Dutch 
dominant perspective on water; risks and opportunities involved, J. Environ. Sci. 
Health, Part A 48 (10) (2013) 1164 – 1177, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10934529.2013.776438 . 
E.C. Penning-Rowsell, S.J. Priest, Adaptation to Flood Risk: The Role of Insurance, 
Knowledge for Climate report, Utrecht, 2014 . 
P. Sayers, G. Galloway, E. Penning-Rowsell, Li Yuanyuan, Shen Fuxin, Chen Yiwei, T. Le 
Wen Kang, Lei Wang Quesne, Yuhui Guan, Strategic flood management: ten ‘golden 
rules ’ to guide a sound approach, Int. J. River Basin Manage. 13 (2) (2015) 137 – 151 . 
Michael Schwarz, Michael Thompson. Divided We Stand: Redefining Politics, 
Technology, and Social Choice, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990 . 
M. Thompson, R. Ellis, A. Wildavsky, Cultural Theory, Westview Press, Boulder, 1990 . 
Thompson, M. (2002). Understanding Environmental Values: A Cultural Theory 
Approach. Event paper, Carnegie Council on Ethics and International Affairs. 
Downloadable at Carnegie Council. https://www.dustinstoltz.com/blog/2014/06/ 
04/diagram-of-theory-douglas-and-wildavskys-gridgroup-typology-of-worldviews. 
Sun-Ki Chai, Ming Liu, Min-Sun Kim, Cultural comparisons of beliefs and values: 
applying the grid-group approach to the world values survey, Beliefs Values 1 (2) 
(2009) 193 – 208 . 
UN (United Nations General Assembly) (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Resolution 70/1, adopted by the General 
Assembly on 25 September 2015. 
M.B.A. van Asselt van, H. Middelkoop, S.A. Klooster van ’ t, et al.. Development of Flood 
Management Strategies for the Rhine and Meuse Basins in the Context of Integrated 
River Management, IRMA-SPONGE, Delft, 2001. IRMA-SPONGE project 3/NL/1/ 
164 / 99 15 183 01 NRP project 958273 . 
Van der Most H., T ´anczos, I., De Bruijn, K.M. & Wagenaar, D. (2014). New, risk-based 
standards for flood protection in the Netherlands. Proceedings of the 6th 
international conference on flood management (ICFM6), September 2014, Sao 
Paulo, Brazil. 
M.F. Van Staveren, Integrated Flood Management in the context of climate change, 
Vietnam. Evaluating the effects of Integrated Flood Management on flood risks in a 
climate change scenario, Wageningen University, 2007. MSc Thesis . 
M.F. Van Staveren, J.P.M. van Tatenhove, J.F. Warner, The tenth dragon: controlled 
seasonal flooding in long-term policy plans for the Vietnamese Mekong delta, 
J. Environ. Plan. Policy Manage. 20 (3) (2018) 267 – 281, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
1523908X.2017.1348287 . 
G.F. White. Human adjustement to floods., The University of Chicago, Chicago, 1945. 
Research Paper no. 29 . 
WMO/GWP Associated Programme on Flood Management, 2017. Selecting measures and 
designing strategies for integrated flood management: a guidance document. Policy 
and Tools Documents Series 1, version 1.0, World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland. 
C. Zevenbergen, S. Alam Khan, J. van Alphen, C. Terwisscha van Scheltinga, 
W. Veerbeek, Adaptive delta management: a comparison between the Netherlands 
and Bangladesh Delta Program, Int. J. River Basin Manage. 16 (3) (2018) 299 – 305, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15715124.2018.1433185 . 
F. Klijn et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     