[[PAGE 1]]
WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN
VOL. 31, NO.3AMERICANWATERRESOURCES ASSOCIATIONJUNE1995
THE LEVEE LOVE AFFAIR: A STORMY RELATIONSHIP?'
Graham A. Tobin2
ABSTRACT: A history of flood control in the United States shows
an undying affair with levees. This love affair, however, was put
severely to the test by the record flooding in the summer of 1993.
About 70 percent of levees in the upper Midwest failed during this
time, leading to extensive damage to both farmland and urban
areas. Consequently, there were repeated calls to re-assess the
nation's floodplain management policies. The report of the Intera-
gency Floodplain Management Review Committee is one outcome of
this and it forms the basis of this commentary on levees. In many
respects, levees are effective flood control measures, being relative-
ly cheap to implement and easy to build. At the same time, levees
have negative impacts, affecting the hydrological regime both up
and down stream, and often exacerbating flooding in other places.
Furthermore, technical weaknesses in design, planning, construc-
tion, and maintenance have all contributed to levee failures. While
the report recommends changes in floodplain management to
address some of these issues, it is difficult to see how these will
materialize given the current political, economic, and social cli-
mate.
(KEY TERMS: flooding; levee systems; policy; water management.)
THE LEVEE LOVE AFFAIR
"Rising floods may be held back by dikes or lev-
ees built on the plains a little distance from the
river banks. When the levees are overtopped or
breached widespread floods may result, such as
occurred on the Mississippi flood plain in April
1897 when about 13,000 square miles of plains,
two-fifths of the entire area, were under water"
(Davis, 1902, p. 264).
The failure of levees and resulting flooding of 1897
was not unusual. Seven years earlier, a flood on the
lower Mississippi had also broken through levees and
caused extensive damage to oyster beds in the Gulf of
Mexico through excessive silt deposits (Davis, 1902).
Smith (1854, p. 148) made reference to other floods in
Louisiana that overtopped levees 40 feet high; "The
land is often lower than the rivers, being protected
from inundation by levees, as they are called, which
are large banks thrown up by the sides of rivers." In
fact, attempts at flood control in the Mississippi River
valley can be traced back at least as far as 1717 with
reports of levee construction in New Orleans (NHRA-
IC, 1992). At the same time, new buildings and settle-
ments have encroached onto floodplains, thus
exposing more and more people and property to peri-
odic inundation from the Mississippi River. From such
beginnings, the call for community flood protection
was born, with the federal government held responsi-
ble for flood alleviation. The Flood Control Acts of
1917, 1927, 1928, 1936, 1938, and 1944 were a direct
outcome of this philosophy. Furthermore, the flood-
plain management strategies implemented by the fed-
eral government, at least until the late 1960s, reflect
an overwhelming bias towards structural measures;
engineering "solutions" that aimed to eliminate flood
problems (Johnston Associates, 1989). The focus was
not on how best to mitigate flood losses, but on
whether levees and reservoirs should or should not be
built. Over the years, therefore, levees became one of
the primary tools for fighting floods, and so the Unit-
ed States became inveigled into its "levee love affair."
In spite of billions of dollars invested in flood allevi-
ation projects, particularly levees, flood losses in the
United States have continued to rise. According to
some estimates, mean annual flood losses now
amount to nearly $3 billion, and per capita flood loss-
es are 2.5 times higher for the period 1951 to 1985,
compared with 1916 through 1950 (NHRAIC 1992).
Recurring floods in the first half of the 20th century
1Paper No. 95011 of the Water Resources Bulletin. Discussions are open until February 1, 1996.
2Professor of Geography, Department of Geography, University of Minnesota Duluth, Duluth, Minnesota 55812.
359WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN

[[PAGE 2]]
merely strengthened resolve to control flooding, as
seen in the series of Flood Control Acts, and perpetu-
ated demands for engineering "solutions," especially
levees or reservoirs. Throughout this period, there-
fore, the often-repeated scenario has been one of
"flood disaster-levee construction-flood disaster," and
so on, with one disaster followed by another. By the
1960s, however, it was apparent that implementation
of simple engineering measures could not completely
eliminate flood losses, and consequently a change in
strategy was called for (White, 1965). This philosophi-
cal change focused attention on comprehensive pro-
grams for managing flood losses, and emphasized the
need to incorporate non-structural adjustments as
integral parts of flood alleviation strategies (ITFFM,
1986). Nevertheless, while remarkable progress has
been made in broadening perspectives on flood miti-
gation, the infatuation with levees has endured. Lev-
ees still represent an important component of flood
alleviation projects for many communities, although
the events of 1993 have stimulated further debate
about the effectiveness of this levee relationship.
The following commentary on levees, therefore, is
an attempt to pull some of these ideas together. While
the focus is on the upper Mississippi River Basin
floods of 1993, some general principles are also dis-
cussed. The commentary is based on the Interagency
Floodplain Management Review Committee's report,
directed by G. E. Galloway, to the Administration
Floodplain Management Task Force (IFMRC, 1994),
and various state reports of Interagency Hazard Miti-
gation Teams.
LEVEE SYSTEMS
There are over 25,000 miles of levees, floodwalls,
embankments, and dikes offering flood protection to
land and communities throughout the United States
(Johnston Associates, 1989). Over the years, these
levees have been constructed by different agencies,
organizations, local authorities and individuals. The
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) has been a
prime mover in this respect, being responsible for
designing and constructing more than 10,500 miles of
levees and floodwalls. These officially sanctioned
structures offer protection up to the 100-year flood
event for over 5,000 square miles of flood-prone land,
and 1,000 communities, or approximately 5.5 percent
of floodplain communities (NHRAIC, 1992). The
remaining levees, many of which do not meet official
standards, provide different levels of protection to
farm land and small communities.
Tobm
In the upper Mississippi River basin there are
approximately 8,000 miles of levees, representing a
mix of age, ownership, size, and quality. They have
been built for a variety of reasons and by different
interested parties. Some were built during times of
the earliest settlements and have gradually been
enlarged, while others are relatively new. Since the
1936 Flood Control Act, 2,249 miles of levees have
been built by USACE in the upper Mississippi River
Basin. Of these, 42 miles are still maintained by the
federal government and the rest by local districts.
Others have been built by small land-owners (IFMRC,
1994). It is a combination of these traits that has con-
tributed to the success or failure of levee systems.
Levee Functions
The implementation of levee projects has become a
common practice because levees are, for the most
part, relatively cheap and easy to build; they provide
good protection up to their design standards; and
their presence may instill a useful reminder of the
flood threat. In addition, few negative political reper-
cussions result from supporting levee projects. Given
this, perhaps it is not surprising that levees have
become a ubiquitous feature of floodplain communi-
ties.
Levee systems are effective in controlling floods
and can significantly reduce flood losses. For example,
the lower Mississippi River valley suffered extensive
flooding in 1973 that resulted in over $1 billion dol-
lars damage, inundated 13 million acres and left
69,000 people homeless. USACE estimated that the
flood alleviation measures prevented an additional
$15 billion damage and saved a further 10 million
acres from flooding (National Science Foundation,
1980). Many levees were damaged during the flood,
but the control structures significantly reduced losses.
Similarly, in 1993 levees saved many communities
from disaster. IFMRC (1994) reported that without
levees or floodwalls, low lying areas in Rock Island
and Moline, Illinois, and Kansas City would have
been flooded. At St. Louis, the Mississippi crested at
49.6 feet, almost 20 feet above flood stage, yet the city
was not inundated because of protection from a large
flood wall. Many smaller communities suffered only
minor inconveniences because levees effectively kept
water out of the built up areas.
While these savings are remarkable and suggest
very positive benefit-cost ratios for levee projects,
they conceal another problem. It is possible that these
communities would not have expanded onto floodplain
lands to the same extent if the levee had not been con-
structed in the first place. The implementation of the
WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN360
 17521688, 1995, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1995.tb04025.x by Unibibl. Der Hu Berlin - Grimm-Zentrum, Wiley Online Library on [03/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 3]]
The Levee Love Affair: A Stormy Relationship?
structural measure, therefore, has placed more prop-
erty at risk to the flood hazard, and suggests that the
accounting system for benefits is somewhat flawed.
This is discussed further below.
Levee Liabilities
Theoretically, the protection offered by levees is vir-
tually 100 percent up to the design standards of the
project. Water is confined to the floodway away from
urban agglomerations and productive agricultural
lands. Unfortunately, though, several factors can com-
bine to compromise levee effectiveness, including,
hydrological factors, changing environmental condi-
tions, technical weaknesses, and social constraints.
Hydrological Factors. One problem highlighted
by the events of 1993 was the potential for increased
flooding created by poor placement of the levees.
Since levees are designed to channel water through a
restricted floodway, flood water is no longer stored on
the natural floodplain, which can produce profound
hydrological consequences. First, water may accumu-
late upstream of the levee system, thus raising flood
stage and exacerbating problems for communities in
that vicinity. Second, water confined between the lev-
ees will be high, and put considerable pressure on the
structure. 'While this in itself may not result in levee
failure, the long-term integrity of the structure may
be compromised. Third, flood problems may also be
transferred downstream as water is accelerated
through the strictures of the levee system. These fea-
tures caught much of the media attention during the
1993 floods, especially as one levee after another
failed (Alder, 1993; Church, 1993). In spite of this
media blitz, concern over negative hydrological conse-
quences from levee construction is not new. For
instance, the Pick-Sloan Plan in 1944 recognized the
importance of storage areas and provided for a 3,000
to 5,000 feet wide floodway between levees along the
Missouri River from Sioux City (Iowa), to St Louis
(Missouri) (IFMRC, 1994). However, this part of the
plan was never implemented.
Several studies have been conducted to determine
the hydrological impact of levee projects on surround-
ing areas during the 1993 floods. For example,
IFMRC (1994) reported on a survey of peak flows on
the Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois Rivers above
Cairo (Illinois). This indicated that discharges would
have been 2.5 feet lower at St. Louis if upstream lev-
ees had not been built. However, an assumption of the
study was that floodplains would be relatively clear
with no trees to impede flows. While this is not realis-
tic, the research does support the notion that levees
can exacerbate flood problems downstream. Further-
more, discharges on these rivers were so high that
even without levees flows would have exceeded flood
stage by 17 feet. To control all flows the levee system
would have had to have been about 2.3 feet higher
(IFMRC, 1994). Other reviews demonstrated that
breaching and overtopping of levees reduced peaks by
1.6 feet in St. Louis. The multiple levee failures in
Illinois allowed some attenuation of the flood peaks,
although the positive effects were often limited since
levels usually rose once the storage component had
been filled. For example, when the Sny Island levee
failed, flooding 44,000 acres, the peak stage on the
Mississippi River at Hannibal (Missouri), fell from
approximately 31.5 feet to 27 feet in less than two
days, then during the next two days rose 1.5 feet
(Bhowmik et al., 1994). Agricultural levees also con-
fused the picture. Many of these offer protection only
to the 50-year flood or less, and hence were frequently
overtopped during the 1993 floods. Their impact on
these floods, however, may have been minimal. Hall
(1991) used a flow model to show that even if agricul-
tural levees were realigned to accommodate a regula-
tory 100-year floodway, flood peaks of the 100-year
event would be reduced by only 1.5 feet. In effect,
then, the failure of the levees allowed water to be
stored on the old floodplain. USACE took advantage
of this and on at least one occasion intentionally
breached a levee to release pressure on other struc-
tures and to lower flood levels (Bhowmik et al., 1994).
Based on these findings, the IFMRC report concluded
that levees have only minor overall effects on flood
stage during large events, although there may be sig-
nificant local impacts.
Changing Environmental Conditions. A second
concern is changing environmental conditions that
can significantly alter the hydrological regime of a
river. For instance, an increase in deforestation,
urbanization, or agricultural drainage within a
drainage basin can lead to a more flashy storm hydro-
graph, thus increasing the frequency and raising the
peak discharge of particular floods. These changes
can reduce the level of protection offered and may
threaten the viability of levees. In the last 50 years
nearly 500,000 acres of floodplain, including wet-
lands, has been lost along the Missouri River in
Nebraska, Iowa, Kansas, and Missouri, mainly from
agricultural drainage. In 1993, this activity was often
blamed for high flood levels, the principle being that
wetlands act as sponges, storing water during high
flows. Certainly, this is true of many wetlands, but
the capacity of such systems to attenuate flood flows
of the 1993 magnitude is debatable. Nevertheless,
some attention is being given to restoring certain wet-
land environments along the Mississippi River basin.
In this regard, the Interagency Hazard Mitigation
361WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN
 17521688, 1995, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1995.tb04025.x by Unibibl. Der Hu Berlin - Grimm-Zentrum, Wiley Online Library on [03/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 4]]
Team (IHMT) for South Dakota recommended con-
structing levees away from the river to provide three
to five times more floodway space (IHMT, 1993).
The precise impacts of both changing environmen-
tal conditions and the implementation of control
structures is not fully known. What is apparent, how-
ever, is that flood stages for comparable discharges on
several rivers have increased, as shown in Table 1.
For example, at St. Louis the previous record dis-
charge of 1.3 million cubic feet per second occurred in
1844 and culminated in a stage of 43.23 feet. During
the 1993 flood, the river rose to 49.47 feet from a dis-
charge of only 1.03 million cubic feet per second (Par-
rett, 1993). Similar increases are found at other
gauging stations for pre- and post-regulation data. It
is not surprising, therefore, that some levee systems
no longer meet original design criteria.
Technical Weaknesses. The 1993 flooding severe-
ly tested levee systems along most reaches of the Mis-
sissippi, Missouri, and their tributaries. Of the 1,576
levees under stress, 1,082 (68.5 percent) failed, leav-
ing 6,000 miles of levees ineffective (Mairson, 1994;
United Press International, 1993). Others suffered
extensive damage from soil moisture seeping through
the structure after prolonged high water levels
(Myers and White, 1993). At one time, levee systems
from Burlington (Iowa) to Cairo (Illinois) on the Mis
sissippi, and from Nebraska to St, Louis on the Mis-
souri were essentially non-operational because of
breaks and overtopping (National Weather Service,
1993). In Illinois there were 19 large levee breaks
that inundated over 250,000 acres between July 7 and
August 3.
An examination of the pattern of levee failure is of
interest. Only 20 percent of federally constructed and
maintained levees failed; in other words, 80 percent
were successful. For example, in Dubuque (Iowa), the
flood wall, that had been erected after the 1964 floods,
protected the town from river flooding (Telegraph
Tobin
Herald, 1993). In addition, only 17 percent of levees
constructed by the federal government and main-
tained by local agencies failed. In contrast, many pri-
vately owned levees were unsuccessful. Over 77
percent failed, including farm levees, and other struc-
tures intended to protect small communities. These
private levees were not subject to the same design
standards as the federal levees and consequently
were sometimes poorly constructed or not well main-
tained (Tobin and Montz, 1994).
Flood fighting in the form of levee protection went
on in many communities as the floods moved down-
stream. Once again, the media covered these activi-
ties extensively. Sandbagging teams were put
together and people arrived from all over the country
to help in the battle against the river. Many of these
endeavors failed, such as in Des Moines (Iowa), St.
Charles (Missouri), and East Dubuque, and Quincy
(Illinois). Other sandbagging attempts were success-
ful, as at St Genevieve, and Hannibal (Missouri). In
this latter case, the flood peaked one foot above the
permanent levee, but the town was saved by a tempo-
rary wall that raised the levee three feet. USACE
estimated that 26.5 million sandbags were filled and
distributed during the flooding (Tobin and Montz,
1994).
In many cases, levees failed because of technical
weaknesses. Levees have sometimes been poorly
designed, or construction methods and maintenance
schedules have been substandard. Inadequate atten-
tion to these technical details has led to major weak-
nesses in the flood alleviation strategy. For instance,
at times insufficient freeboard has been allowed at
the top of levees, thus contributing to their failure as
water plunges over the top or waves wash along the
sides. For example, the levee at Black River Falls
(Wisconsin) did not meet a three feet clearance
requirement above the 100-year flood height and
eventually failed (Heinrichs, 1993). It is believed that
overtopping or failure of levees and flood walls is
TABLE 1. Discharge and Flood Stage for Selected Gauging Stations
(data adopted from Parrett et al., 1993).
Gauging Station
Pre-Regulated RecordsPost.Regulated Records
Peak Stage
(feet)
Maximum
Discharge
(cfs)
Peak Stage
(feet)
Maximum
Discharge
(cfs)
Missouri St. Joseph26.82397,00032.70400,000
Missouri Kansas City38.00625,00048.85530,000
Missouri Booneville32.8271000036.95717,000
Missouri Herman35.50892,00036.95748,000
Mississippi St. Louis43.231,300,00049.471,030,000
WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN362
 17521688, 1995, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1995.tb04025.x by Unibibl. Der Hu Berlin - Grimm-Zentrum, Wiley Online Library on [03/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 5]]
The Levee Love Affair: A Stormy Relationship?
involved in approximately one-third of all flood disas-
ters (NHRAIC, 1992).
Levee failure can bring additional problems. If the
structure is breached, then a large volume of water
may rush through the opening at high velocity con-
tributing to damage problems. Also, once a levee has
been breached, then water is often retained behind
the structure making drainage difficult. Levees can
act as barriers preventing the water from returning to
the river, thus necessitating pumps or other mainte-
nance activities. In many instances, it can take weeks
for flood water to return to the confines of the chan-
nels.
Another consequence of levee failure is scouring
and deposition of sediment. Evidence from aerial pho-
tography, satellite imagery, and floodplain maps sug-
gests that 90 percent of the areas affected by
significant floodplain erosion and sedimentation were
those where levees had been damaged. When a levee
breaks, water is released at high velocity, which
erodes material from the surrounding area before
spreading out and depositing sediment across the
adjacent floodplain. The water plunging over a high
levee can also exacerbate this scouring effect. Magilli-
gan et at. (1994) examined some of these levee failures
in Illinois and found horseshoe shaped deposits ema-
nating from the levee break. The scouring can extend
for a mile or more downstream, and deposit sediment
over extensive areas. For example, the failure of sev-
eral levees in Hartsburg (Missouri) led to inundation
of the town and to thick deposits of sediment across
farm fields (Tobin and Ollenburger 1994). According
to Cassidy (1994) floods deposited sand on 60 percent
(455,171 acres) of the agricultural land along the Mis-
souri River floodplain. Sediment deposits exceeded
nine inches on 277,585 acres, and averaged 24 inches
on 91,000 acres.
Part of the problem is that levees have been con-
structed by different agencies to different standards.
The physical composition, placement relative to the
river, and maintenance all differ among levees. Older
structures were often built without regard for
hydraulic conditions and have failed on many occa-
sions because of swift flowing water and high flows
relative to structures, such as at cut-offs, where high
energy hydrological conditions prevail. Thus, some-
times it is difficult to determine accurately what level
of protection is offered and more modeling is suggest-
ed, such as that undertaken by Uno et al. (1994). Also,
some failures in 1993 resulted from long duration
flooding which caused water to "boil up" under pres-
sure through the ground and undermine the levee.
While regular maintenance could have stopped some
of this, nothing short of major reconstruction would
have prevented most failures.
Better planning and maintenance could have
prevented some levee breaks in 1993. The IFMRC
(1994) report recommended that levee systems incor-
porate safety features, such as spillways and control
structures. It was also suggested that levee districts
endorse a "levee superiority" strategy to identify lev-
ees that would be designed to "fail" first. Reducing the
height or notching these particular levees so that
areas behind them flooded would reduce the pressure
on other parts of the system during large events.
Some problems may also have stemmed from the
efforts of those fighting the floods. For instance, there
has been little assessment of the effects sandbagging
might have had elsewhere in the drainage basin. By
increasing levee height through sandbags, the flood
stage in particular reaches of the channel is raised
and this may put undue pressure on other protection
works located downstream. Consequently, IFMRC rec-
ommends that flood fighting be concentrated at those
places recognized by an agency such as USACE. Fur-
thermore, advanced planning for such strategies
would have to be consistent with NFIP and other
floodplain regulations.
While levee superiority strategies might prove
advantageous from a hydrological or even economic
perspective, they ignore the psychological benefits
that might accrue from flood fighting. Many people
reported on the camaraderie and fulfillment gained
from "doing something" about the floods, even if this
was from filling and stacking sandbags. Furthermore,
levee superiority practices could lead to impossible
situations for floodplain managers. It would, for
instance, be extremely difficult to tell one group of
residents to stop taking action to prevent flooding,
such as raising a temporary levee, while allowing
another group in a different location to continue. The
whole notion could be divisive to a community unless
levee superiority was carefully planned to exclude res-
idential areas, and at the same time provide compen-
sation to land owners who are flooded as a result. It is
possible that assessments could be levied against
downstream beneficiaries (IHMT-Kansas, 1993). To
counter such problems, IFMRC (1994) recommended
that the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) coordinate activities to achieve floodplain
management goals.
Levee failures could also have been reduced by
better maintenance and repair. Of the 1,600 levees
ultimately damaged by the flooding, 1,400 were non-
federal, and less than 500 were part of the USACE
Emergency Flood-Control Repair Program (PL 84-99).
Of these, only 229 were constructed by USACE
(IFMRC, 1994). It should be noted that there are dif-
ferent data available on numbers of levees damaged,
(see for example, Bhowmik et at., 1994; or NOAA,
1994) although it is not the specific numbers that are
363WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN
 17521688, 1995, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1995.tb04025.x by Unibibl. Der Hu Berlin - Grimm-Zentrum, Wiley Online Library on [03/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 6]]
of concern here. Some levees had originally been part
of the USACE repair program but had been excluded
because local authorities had failed to operate and
maintain structures properly, had not obtained public
sponsorship, or had not met satisfactory engineering
standards.
To be officially sanctioned, levees must meet cer-
tain criteria. FEMA, for example, requires that levees
protect communities from the annual 0.01 probability
flood, as part of the National Flood Insurance Pro-
gram (NFIP). Even this was considered too low by the
Committee on Levee Policy for the National Flood
Insurance Program (1982) who wanted a 500-year
return event standard. To be eligible for the USACE
repair program, levees must provide adequate protec-
tion, be sponsored by a public entity, and be main-
tained to USACE standards. The costs for repairs are
shared 80 percentJ2o percent between USACE and
the public entity (IFMRC 1994), and local sponsors
must ensure all land, easements, and rights of way
necessary for repairs. As a result, most smaller levees
are not usually included in the USACE repair pro-
gram.
Only 15 percent of non-federal levees qualified for
federal assistance under the normal guidelines after
the 1993 floods. However, because flooding was so
severe, many levees were repaired using supplemen-
tal funding. Some new regulations were attached to
these funds. USACE required that levee districts
agree to join the USACE repair program, find public
sponsorship within two years, ensure levee mainte-
nance, and meet environmental, engineering, and
other eligibility requirements. The report recommend-
ed that in future no waivers be given, but that the
current program be supported (IFMRC, 1994). It was
thought that greater adherence to regulations would
eventually encourage communities and states to
adopt more stringent levee policies. This was not pos-
sible after the 1993 floods because of weighty political
pressure exerted to include non-federal levees in
repair plans (Tobin and Montz, 1994).
The whole issue of levee systems is further con-
fused by a plethora of responsible organizations all
utilizing different criteria for decision-making. Five
federal agencies are involved in the funding, design,
construction, and repair activities: USACE, USDA
Soil Conservation Service (SCS), FEMA, Economic
Development Administration (EDA), and the Depart-
ment of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
These agencies use different methods of analysis to
assess both engineering standards and economic ben-
efits, which can result in some confusion. IFMRC
(1994) recommended that USACE be established as
the principal agency for levee construction on main
rivers because of its long experience with levees. In
addition, SCS should assist in small structures, and
Tobin
states and local drainage districts should fund levee
building to various degrees. At a minimum, cost-
sharing proportions should be standardized to pre-
vent districts from seeking better deals from different
agencies. These differences in cost-sharing can be
found in many areas, including project design, land
acquisition, and credit for in-kind services. For
instance, the levee emergency rehabilitation program
under SCS requires a cost-share of 25 percent of the
cost of the project, excluding inspections and design,
from the local sponsor, whereas the USACE program,
requires no local cost-sharing for federally built lev-
ees. For non-federal levees, the local share is 20 per-
cent including the costs for design and inspections.
The picture is complicated by EDA which requires
between 20 and 25 percent, and FEMA which
requires a 25 percent local share (IFMRC, 1994),
although after the 1993 floods, FEMA actually
reduced the share requirement to 10 percent. Conse-
quently, many levees have been repaired without due
considerations beyond those needs of the local area.
Furthermore, not all states have programs to con-
trol levee construction. Very few states have imple-
mented permit programs to review levee proposals for
compliance with state-established standards for
design, construction, and repair. Few states control
where levees are placed relative to channels, and
none has a comprehensive plan to determine which
levees should be protected during the flood. In addi-
t:ion, since federal agencies deal directly with local
levee districts, states often have no involvement in
planning. Nevertheless, ASFPM (1992) pointed out
that of the nine states experiencing major flooding in
1993, only Missouri and South Dakota did not have
r:iver regulations that exceeded NFIP minimum stan-
dards. On the other hand, only Iowa, Minnesota,
Nebraska, and Wisconsin attempted to regulate devel-
opment behind levees.
The IFMRC (1994) report strongly advocated that
states get more involved with levee permitting, main-
tenance, and repair. Many levees had been dropped
from the USACE emergency levee repair program,
and, therefore, had no resources to repair structures
once they failed. The report states that several mid-
western communities did not belong to a levee district
and consequently were not involved in levee mainte-
nance or flood fighting decisions. Therefore, states
should be involved and help coordinate levee repair
and maintenance, especially for those not eligible for
federal funding assistance. Specific recommendations
for individual states varied (IHMT, 1993). In North
Dakota, it was recommended that non-federal levees
be repaired to pre-flood conditions with federal money
only if sponsors developed a repair and maintenance
program. In contrast, in Nebraska consideration was
given to not repairing non-federal levees if they were
WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN364
 17521688, 1995, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1995.tb04025.x by Unibibl. Der Hu Berlin - Grimm-Zentrum, Wiley Online Library on [03/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 7]]
The Levee Love Affair: A Stormy Relationship?
located on the regulatory floodway. Levee set backs
were also recommended in Minnesota and Missouri,
while in Illinois routine maintenance of non-federal
levees was recommended.
Social Constraints. It has been argued that the
area behind levees may be at greater risk than nor-
mal because of the "levee effect." While a comprehen-
sive examination of the levee effect has not been
undertaken, evidence suggests that the construction
of levees can exacerbate flood losses under certain cir-
cumstances. Like all structural measures implement-
ed to alleviate flooding, levees are designed to specific
standards, perhaps the 100-year event. Since it is eco-
nomically impractical, and probably aesthetically
undesirable, to build levees to withstand extremely
large, low-probability floods, this level of protection is
not unusual in levees approved by the USACE. In
many cases it will not be possible to build a levee sys-
tem to prevent all flood damage (ITFFM, 1986). Once
the project has been constructed, however, the struc-
ture may generate a false sense of security to the
extent that floodplain inhabitants perceive that all
flooding has been eliminated. With the incentive to
take precautions removed, few residents will be pre-
pared for remedial action in the event of future floods.
Even more costly, however, this false sense of security
can also lead to greater development in the so-called
safe areas, thus adding to the property placed at risk.
Inevitably, a flood will occur that exceeds levee
design standards, overtopping or breaching the levee
system and inundating the community. It is impor-
tant to remember that the project may be very effec-
tive up to its design standards, but any flood beyond
that size will result in some flooding, assuming all
calculations have been correct. In effect, therefore, the
breaking of the levee because of high water is not nec-
essarily a failure of the flood alleviation strategy, but
is actually a feature of the project itself. Neverthe-
less, flood problems are exacerbated by the intensifi-
cation of land use in the hazard area. The real failure
comes from inadequate land use planning and educa-
tion strategies to alert floodplain inhabitants to the
risk of such locations. Finally, when the levee does
fail, the increase in development can actually raise
losses even higher than if no levee system had been
constructed in the first place. Thus, the large claims
of levee induced savings, discussed above, are some-
what fallacious. Recognition of this is not new;
there is a danger that by reason of increased
occupancy and values in the areas subject to
floods after construction of the system of head-
water reservoirs, the damages over a long period
of years might be greater rather than less, in
spite of the 300-, 400-, or 500-million dollar
expenditure that these works might cost."
(Segoe, 1937, p. 55).
Virtually every levee failure in 1993, and in the
past, has resulted in increased flood losses. Take for
example the Monarch-Chesterfield levee. This struc-
ture was originally an agricultural levee that had
been repeatedly damaged by floods. In the 1980s,
however, it was upgraded to meet early NFIP stan-
dards, thus providing protection from the 100-year
event. Gradually, development occurred behind the
levee, including construction of a new industrial
estate. Also, the second airport in St. Louis (the Spirit
of St. Louis) is located in the "safe area" of the
Monarch-Chesterfield levee. When the levee failed,
there were 67 flood insurance claims payments from
property owners behind the levee that totaled $13.2
million, which represents nearly 5 percent of all
claims for the nine states flooded during the summer.
Damage to the airport added another $1.7 million
(IFMRC, 1994). Furthermore, levee failures to the
north of St. Louis destroyed many homes and trailer
parks on both sides of the Missouri River.
The above discussion, however, ignores completely
any potential psychological benefits that a false sense
of security might generate. It is possible, for instance,
that a perception of safety, even if false, will reduce
day-to-day stress of living in a flood prone environ-
ment. In the long-run, these benefits might outweigh
costs accruing from flooding. While psychological ben-
efits might be very difficult to test empirically, since
measures of increased anxiety stemming from actual
flood events would have to incorporated into any
experimental design, it might be worth considering
for some communities. Perhaps a study into the value
of reduced stress is necessary.
To counter problems associated with the levee
effect, IFMRC (1994) recommended that flood insur-
ance be required behind all levees that provide protec-
tion to less than the standard flood. This would
include all areas lying below the 100-year flood level
but located on the "safe" side of the levee. Insurance
would be mandatory and owners of new buildings
would pay based on actuarial rates. It could be admin-
istered by NFIP. Thus, property owners and city
infrastructure would be insured against levee failure,
federal expenditures on disaster aid would be
reduced, property owners would become aware of risk,
and communities would have an incentive to seek
other forms of protection. It might even deter exces-
sive development and unwise investment in flood-
plain property.
365WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN
 17521688, 1995, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1995.tb04025.x by Unibibl. Der Hu Berlin - Grimm-Zentrum, Wiley Online Library on [03/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 8]]
Tobin
CONCLUSIONS
Inthe final analysis, floodplain management poli-
cies in the United States will continue to employ levee
systems, embankments and flood walls. Levees pro-
vide good protection up to their design standards for
many communities, and even in 1993, very few feder-
al levees failed. Clearly, the key to success is careful
design, high quality construction, and ongoing main-
tenance programs, possibly under the auspices of the
USACE. The involvement of states and local districts
in levee programs would also seem to be a move in the
right direction. Many states discovered in 1993 that
they had little or no idea about the number and quali-
ty of levees in their jurisdictions. In addition, land use
planning must be pursued to maintain a clear flood-
way, and to discourage over-development behind the
levee. An insurance program for property located in
protected areas but lying below the regulatory flood
level is also worth considering. If these strategies are
adopted fewer levees will fail in future floods, except
of course when there is a repeat of the 1993 events,
then many of the same problems will recur.
One of the most important recommendations of the
IFMRC report is that the upper Mississippi River
Basin should be treated as a single, integrated sys-
tem. While this is not a new idea, the time would
seem ripe to implement a stronger management poli-
cy. Unfortunately, no single agency has responsibility
for the upper Mississippi Drainage Basin. Therefore,
IFMRC recommended that upper Mississippi and
Missouri River Basin Commissions be re-established
to coordinate flood damage reduction. In essence, this
would be an adaptation of the Mississippi River and
Tributaries Project (MRT) which already has some
authority over the whole drainage basin. However,
since the 1927 floods, MRT has focused primarily on
the lower Mississippi River and, in regards to flood-
ing, has taken a pro-structural approach to flood con-
trol. A plan was published for the upper basin in
1982, but it was not particularly directed at flood
damage reduction. (UMRBC, 1982).
A systematic approach to flood alleviation could
encompass the wider perspectives on floodplain man-
agement that have been discussed over the last thirty
years. This would facilitate the adoption of new ideas
and foster greater consideration of more sophisticated
strategies towards flood alleviation that incorporate
both structural and non-structural adjustments. Fur-
thermore, the implementation of structural adjust-
ments in one area could be coordinated with other
plans to ensure that individual projects did not have
negative impacts on other parts of the system. These
concerns need not be limited to new projects. It would
seem pertinent to undertake a major review of exist-
ing flood control measures. This re-assessment should
WATERRESOURCES BULLETIN366
include not only federal levees but also non-federal
levees and agricultural embankments. At the same
time, states and local drainage districts should be
encouraged to adopt repair and maintenance pro-
grams. IFMRC (1994) suggested that such a review
could be the responsibility of the Mississippi River
Basin Commission.
By utilizing a systems approach, it is possible to
view the bigger picture. From a hydrological perspec-
tive, the integrity of the floodplain and the necessity
for an open floodway can be easily understood as one
traces flood flows through a drainage basin. Draining
wetlands, raising flood walls, or constricting flood-
ways is obviously going to exacerbate flood levels at
some point within the system. The physical causes of
these problems are not difficult to comprehend, and
the report made many fine recommendations. Unfor-
tunately, though, it is highly unlikely that many of
these proposals will go forward. Experience has
shown that there are far too many social, political,
and economic factors that will ultimately complicate
the regulation of a human-use system based primarily
on hydrological criteria. Politicians will give lip-
service to some of the ideas, but they will probably not
endorse the fundamental changes proposed in the
report for fear of losing support. Economic constraints
will prevent other aspects from being embraced as
businesses owners and shareholders seek immediate,
short-term returns at the expense of long-term gains.
Indeed, this paper has not addressed many of the
broader economic ramifications of levee construction.
Finally, social pressures and social inertia will ensure
that the status quo prevails, for very quickly the dev-
astation of the floods will be forgotten, to be replaced
by more immediate day-to-day concerns. It is true
that the 1993 floods will always be a benchmark in
the lives of the victims, but this will not modify the
behavior of the majority of floodplain residents. In
their eyes they have experienced their 100- or 500-
year flood and the probability of reoccurrence is
remote.
In conclusion, therefore, it is doubtful that these
floods will lead to major changes in approaches to
flood control, and the love affair with levees will con-
tinue. Certainly programs will continue to evolve, and
the NFIP will be modified in the near future to pre-
vent people taking out policies a few days before the
floods. But, as more time passes since the floods, so
the probability for major change is reduced. There are
many innovative ideas on floodplain management, as
witnessed by the excellent report by IFMRC and
other publications, but the will to change, like the
levee, appears to need strengthening.
 17521688, 1995, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1995.tb04025.x by Unibibl. Der Hu Berlin - Grimm-Zentrum, Wiley Online Library on [03/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


[[PAGE 9]]
The Levee Love Affair: A Stormy Relationship?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to thank Sue Bonfigt and the anonymous
reviewers for help on this commentary.
LITERATURE CITED
Alder, J., 1993. Come Hell or High Water. Newsweek, July 26:15-26.
Association of State Floodplain Managers (ASFPM), 1992. Flood-
plain Management, 1992, State and Local Programs. Associa-
tion of State Floodplain Managers.
Bhowmik, N. G. et al., 1994. The 1993 Flood on the Mississippi
River in Illinois. Miscellaneous Publication 151, Illinois State
Water Survey, Champaign, fllinois, 149 pp.
Cassidy, D. and R. Althaus, 1994. The Flood of 1993: The Economic
Aftermath. Choices, First Quarter, pp. 29-32.
Church, G. J., 1993. Flood, Sweat and Tears. Time, July 26:22-33.
Committee on a Levee Policy for the National Flood Insurance Pro-
gram, 1982. A Levee Policy for the National Flood Insurance
Program. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 107 pp.
Davis, W. M., 1902. Elementary Physical Geography. Ginn and
Company, Boston, Massachusetts, 401 pp.
Hall, B. R., 1991. Impact of Agricultural Levees on Flood Hazards.
Technical Report HL-91-21, prepared for Federal Emergency
Management Agency. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydraulics
Laboratory 44 pp.
Heinrichs, G. (Editor), 1993. The Floods of 1993: The Wisconsin
Experience. Bureau of Water Regulation and Zoning, Depart-
ment of Natural Resources. 52 pp.
Interagency Floodplain Management Review Committee (IFMRC),
1994. Sharing the Challenge: Floodplain Management into the
21st Century. Report to the Administration Floodplain Manage-
ment Task Force, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington
D.C., 191 pp.
Interagency Hazard Mitigation Team (IHMT), 1993. State Reports:
Illinois (FEMA-997-DR-IL, 50 pp.); Kansas (FEMA-1000-DR-
KS, 50 pp.); Minnesota (FEMA-993-DR-MN, 47 pp.); Missouri
(FEMA-989/995/1006-DR-MO, 28 pp.); Nebraska (FEMA-998-
DR-NE, 37 pp.); North Dakota (FEMA-100 1-DR-ND, 34 pp.);
South Dakota (FEMA-999-DR-SD, 31 pp.). Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
Interagency Task Force on Floodplain Management (ITFFM), 1986.
A Unified National Program for Floodplain Management. Feder-
al Emergency Management Agency, U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington D.C.
Johnston Associates, 1989. A Status Report on the Nation's Flood-
plain Management Activity: An Interim Report. Prepared for
Interagency Task Force on Floodplain Management. U.S. Gov-
ernment Printing Office, Washington D.C.
Magilligan, F. J., B. Gomez, J. D. Phillips, A. James, 1994. Anato-
my of Levee Breaks During the Mississippi Flood, 1993. Paper
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association of American
Geographers, San Francisco, California.
Mairson, A., 1994. The Great Flood of '93. National Geographic
185(1):42-81.
Myers, M. F. and G. F. White, 1993. The Challenge of the Mississip-
pi Flood. Environment 35(10):7-35.
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), 1994. The
Great Flood of 1993: Natural Disaster Survey Report. U.S.
Department of Commerce.
National Science Foundation, 1980. A Report on Flood Hazard Miti-
gation. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.,
253 pp.
Natural Hazards Research and Applications Information Center
(NHRAJC), 1992. Floodplain Management in the United States:
An Assessment Report. Summary Report, Prepared for the Fed-
eral Interagency Floodplain Management Task Force, Volume 1,
69 pp.
National Weather Service, 1993. Update on the Midwestern Floods:
Heat and Drought in the East. Special Climate Summary,
Administrative Message, National Weather Service Headquar-
ters 93(2).
Parrett, C., N. B. Melcher, and R. W. James (Jr), 1993. Flood Dis-
charges in the Upper Mississippi River Basin, 1993. U.S. Geo-
logical Survey Circular, 1120-A, U.S. Government Printing
Office, Washington D.C., 14 pp.
Segoe, L., 1937. Flood Control and the Cities. The American City
LII(3):55-56.
Smith, R. C., 1854. Geography on the Productive System. Burgess
and Co. New York, New York, 356 pp.
Telegraph Herald, 1993. The Deluge. Souvenir Section, Telegraph
Herald, (Dubuque) July 22.
Tobin, G. A. and B. E. Montz, 1994. The Great Midwestern Floods
of 1993. Saunders College Publishing, Fort Worth, Texas.
Tobin, G. A. and J. C. Ollenburger, 1994. An Examination of Stress
in a Flood Prone Environment. Papers and Proceedings of
Applied Geography Conferences 17: 74-8 1.
United Press International, 1993. Corps Decided Against Fixing
More Than 350 Missouri Levees. UPI:clarinews@ clarinet.com.
St. Louis, Missouri.
Uno, T., T. Sugii, and M. Hayashi, 1994. Logit Model for River
Levee Stability Evaluation Considering Return Period. Struc-
tural Safety 14 :81-102.
Upper Mississippi River Basin Commission (TJMRBC), 1982. Com-
prehensive Master Plan for the Management of the Upper Mis-
sissippi River System. Minneapolis, Minnesota, 193 pp.
White, G.F. 1965. Optimal Flood Damage: Retrospect and Prospect.
In: Water Research, A. V. Kneese and S. C. Smith (Editors).
Resources For the Future, Johns Hopkins Press. pp. 25 1-269.
367WATER RESOURCES BULLETIN
 17521688, 1995, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1995.tb04025.x by Unibibl. Der Hu Berlin - Grimm-Zentrum, Wiley Online Library on [03/02/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
