[[PAGE 1]]
HAL Id: hal-03303525
https://hal.science/hal-03303525v1
Submitted on 28 Jul 2021
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
The development of socio-economic scenarios for urban
flood risk management
S. Kurzbach, M. Hammond, O. Mark, S. Djordjevic, D. Butler, P.
Gourbesville, J. Batica, W. Veerbeek, S. Birkholz, F. Schlitte, et al.
To cite this version:
S. Kurzbach, M. Hammond, O. Mark, S. Djordjevic, D. Butler, et al.. The development of socio-
economic scenarios for urban flood risk management. Novatech 2013 - 8ème Conférence internationale
sur les techniques et stratégies durables pour la gestion des eaux urbaines par temps de pluie / 8th
International Conference on planning and technologies for sustainable management of Water in the
City, Jun 2013, Lyon, France. ￿hal-03303525￿

[[PAGE 2]]
NOVATECH 2013 
1 
The development of socio-economic scenarios for 
urban flood risk management 
Développement de scénarios socio-économiques pour la 
gestion des risques d'inondation en milieu urbain 
 
Stefan Kurzbach1, Michael Hammond2*, Ole Mark3, Slobodan 
Djordjevic2, David Butler2, Philippe Gourbesville4, Jelena Batica4, 
William Veerbeek5, Sharon Birkholz6, Friso Schlitte7, Albert S. 
Chen2, Natasa Manojlović1, and Gehad Ujeyl1 
 
1  Institute of River and Coastal Engineering, TU Hamburg-Harburg, 
Schwarzenbergstraße 95 (E), 21073, Hamburg, Germany  
2 Centre for Water Systems, Harrison Building, North Park Road, 
University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF, UK m.j.hammond@exeter.ac.uk 
3  DHI, Agern Allé 5, 2970 Hørsholm, Denmark 
4  Polytech’Nice - Sophia Antipolis, Université de Nice - Sophia Antipolis, 
930, Route des Colles, 06903 Biot, France 
5  UNESCO-IHE, PO Box 3015, 2601 DA Delft, Netherlands 
6 Cranfield Water Science Institute, Cranfield University, Cranfield, 
Bedfordshire, MK43 0AL, UK 
7  HWWI, Heimhuder Straße 71, 20148 Hamburg, Germany 
*         Corresponding author m.j.hammond@exeter.ac.uk 
 
RÉSUMÉ 
Les responsables et les professionnels d es réseaux de drainage urbains sont confrontés aux 
incertitudes socio-économiques et climatiques alors que les réseaux de drainage doivent s’adapter à 
la pression de l’urbanisation croissante, à l’essor démographique et à la croissance économique. Une 
manière de gérer l’incertitude liée à cette dynamique est de développer des stratégies de gestion qui 
intègrent différentes options pour le futur. Il y a, par définition , un nombre infini de futurs possibles et 
par conséquent, il peut être utile pour les urban istes de réduire cette diversité à un nombre limité de 
scénarios alliant conditions socio -économiques et climatiques. Cet article décrit les enjeux majeurs 
pour le développement de scenarios et présente un cadre méthodologique pour leur développement. 
Les scénarios peuvent être appliqués sur des environnements urbains afin d’assister les décideurs 
dans leurs prises de décision. 
 
ABSTRACT 
Urban drainage managers and professional are faced with uncertain socio -economic and climate 
futures, as cities and urban  water systems are under pressure due to a number of trends such as 
population growth, economic growth, and increased urbani sation. A way of managing this uncertainty 
is to develop and apply water management strategies that can cope with a range of futures. There are 
an infinite number of possible futures, and therefore, it is useful for planners to develop a limited 
number of scenarios, which describe selected coupled socio -economic and climate futures for a city. 
These scenarios can then aid stakeholders in their decision making processes. This paper describes 
the key challenges of scenario development and the methodology used in the CORFU project. 
 
KEYWORDS 
Cities, Climate change, Flood risk, Scenarios, Socio-economic futures, Urban drainage 

[[PAGE 3]]
C3 - T.A / EFFICACITÉ GLOBALE / BMPs & GLOBAL EFFICIENCY 
2 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Urban water professionals and planners are faced with the challenge of working with systems that are 
under increasing pressure. One particular challenge is to manage the risk of urban flooding, in highly 
dynamic cities. There are several observed and projected trends that are expected to increase the risk 
of flooding in cities.  
One of these trends is increased urbanization . The United N ations (UN) recently reported that  the 
world’s population living in urban areas has overtaken the rural proportion, and that the world’s urban 
population is projected to grow , both in absolute terms, and as a fraction of a growing global 
population (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs/Population Division, 2012) . 
Between 2011 and 2050, the world population has been projecte d to increase by 2.3 billion, from 7.0 
billion to 9.3 billion. At the same time, the population living in urban areas is projected to increase from 
3.6 billion in 2011, to 6.3 billion in 2050. This represents a growth from 51% to 68% of the gl obal 
population. As more people live in cities, more people are expected to be exposed to flooding. 
Another trend arises from the possibility for climate change to result in more extreme rainfall patterns 
and sea level rise. Some studies have already shown statisticall y significant trends in extreme rainfall 
in Denmark (Arnbjerg-Nielsen, 2006)  and in North America  (Peterson et al., 2008) . However, the 
global pattern of obser ved trends in extreme precipitation is marked by differing levels of confidence. 
As for future projections, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states that “it is likely 
that the frequency of heavy precipitation or proportion of total rain fall from heavy falls will increase in 
the 21st century over many areas on the globe” (Field et al., 2012).  
Moreover, other trends will also have an impact on flood risk. Economic growth may change the value 
of exposed assets in urban areas, which could affect the expected impacts of flooding (Jongman et al., 
2012). An increase in the number of people living in cities will almost certainly  lead to land -use 
changes, which could have an impact on the hydrological and hydraulic behaviour (Merz et al., 2010). 
Changes in the economic structure may also have an impact on the spatial distribution of land -use 
types. Furthermore, development may follow a pattern of increased low -density sprawl, or 
alternatively, high-density residential housing may prevail in some cities. Finally , demographic 
changes may also lead to differences in the age structure of the population, where , for example, a 
more elderly population may be more vulnerable to flooding.  However, beyond the numbers, there are 
often forces that are more difficult to quantify, that can affect th e vulnerability of communities to 
flooding. Migration into cities can be the result of wider social trends than just economic growth, and 
can determine social structure and organisation in the city. 
There has been an increased interest in the concept of fl ood resilience, where improving the flood 
resilience of cities has become a central aim in good flood risk management. There is a burgeoning 
literature in this field and it has become an active topic of research (Gersonius et al., 2010; Schelfaut 
et al., 2011) . Although, definitions of resilience vary in the literature, within this study, we take the 
approach that resilience is the ability to absorb , resist, recover and continu ally adapt to a changing 
flood risk. Flood resilient communities have improved capacities at all stages of the flood management 
cycle, that includes mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery (Mark and Djordjevi c, 2006) . 
Flood resilient cities and the people who live there are aware of the flood risk they face, and are well -
prepared and can respond better if and when a flood occurs.  
The Collaborative Research on Flood Risk in Urban Areas (CORFU) project (www.corfu7.eu) was 
established to develop and assess the effectiveness of different resilience and flood risk management 
strategies in cities. The project is working with partners in case study cities across Europe and Asia. 
The case study cities face unique cha llenges as a result of different drivers and pressures, although 
how these pressures will affect these cities are uncertain. To be able to understand how these drivers 
and pressures may affect future flood risk, and how managers can deal with them, it woul d be useful 
to develop and apply a range of climate and socio -economic scenarios that can be used to evaluate 
the effectiveness of different strategies. Within the CORFU project, a Drivers -Pressures-State-
Impacts-Response (DPSIR) framework will be develope d and applied.  The drivers and pressures 
derived from the scenario development process will be linked to changes in urban flooding and its 
impacts, and possible responses or resilience strategies will be assessed to examine their 
effectiveness. This is  further elaborated in Djordjević et al (2011). In this paper, we will describe the 
development of scenarios on the city or sub-city scales that can be used in urban flood hazard, impact, 
and vulnerability model ling. In addition, these scenarios will form the basis for developing adaptation 
strategies and resilience assessment. 

[[PAGE 4]]
NOVATECH 2013 
3 
2 KEY ISSUES IN SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT 
A useful way to deal with an uncertain future is to consider the long -term consequences of different 
socio-economic and climate scenarios and the strategies implemented to mitigate problems that arise 
from these scenarios (Parson, 2008). A scenario here is defined as “ a plausible and often simplified 
description of how the future may develop, based on a coherent and internally consistent set of 
assumptions about driving forces and key relationships” (Parry et al., 2007) . Each scenario is one 
alternative image of how the future might unfold. Scenario componen ts constitute the socio-economic 
reference conditions for urban development and projections of the future climate. 
In this study, several challenges in scenari o development stand out. The first is to be clear in 
understanding why the scenarios are being de veloped. The overall aim of the CORFU project is to 
assess flood impacts and possible responses in urban areas by envisaging different scenarios of 
relevant drivers: urban development, socio -economic trends, and climate changes. The second 
challenge is to adapt global scenarios to the city, or sub -city scale, while retaining the larger narrative, 
to allow for comparison of the results of all CORFU case study cities. The third challenge is to provide 
narratives that provide a broad coverage of the possible futures for these cities.  
The use of scenarios in research has a long history. The most prominent set of scenarios has been 
developed by the IPCC. In their Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES), the IPCC presented 
four families of scenarios, A1, A2, B1, and B2 (Nakicenovic et al., 2000) , each containing a different 
storyline or narrative of a possible future. For example, the A1 scenario family described a future world 
of very rapid economic growth, global population that peaks in mid -century and declines thereafter, 
and the rapid introduction of new and more efficient technologies. 
However, for the new IPCC 5 th Assessment Report (AR5)  Moss et al . (2010) argue that the way in 
which the scenarios are developed should be changed. In the SRES, the scenarios were developed in 
a linear process, wh ereby socio -economic factors were described, which in turn, influenced 
greenhouse gas emissions, which caused changes in the atmosphere, global temperatures, and 
ultimately impacts on people and the environment. It has been argued that this approach should  be 
replaced by a parallel approach, whereby radiative forcings for climate modelling are developed which 
are not associated with any unique socio -economic scenario. In parallel with these  forcings, new 
socio-economic and emissions scenarios can be develop ed and then integrated with the results of 
new climate scenarios to allow researchers to produce new impact, adaptation and vulnerability 
studies.  
Kriegler et al . (2012) have argued for the need to develop global, shared socio -economic pathways 
(SSPs) that would feed into the development process. It was proposed that these SSPs could be 
developed by relating them to two axes: challenges to mitigation  and challenges to adaptation . A 
pathway with high challenges to mitigation would represent a future which would lead to higher 
emissions and where technological, institutional or other conditions were poorly suited to reducing 
emissions. A pathway with greater challenges to adaptatio n would be one where exposure and 
sensitivity to climate change were high, and the capacity to adapt would be low. Beyond these global 
scenarios, there is the need to downscale them to specific regions and locations, and also to use them 
in relation to specific fields.  
Scenarios have been used more specifically within the field of water management. Within the UK, as 
part of the UK’s Office of Science and Technology ’s Foresight Future project, four broad socio -
economic scenarios were developed, referred to as World Markets , National Enterprise , Local 
Stewardship, and Global Sustainability. The scenarios were not developed specifically for the water 
industry, and were intended to be used by the UK government as a scenario building framework. The 
scenarios were defined by their position on two axes. The first axis represented social values, which 
ranged from individualistic values at one extreme, to community oriented values at the other end. The 
second axis represented the systems of governance, which ranged f rom systems from which national 
governments retained all autonomy, to interdependence at the other extreme, where much of the 
decision making powers had moved to other institutions, to include both regional governments, and 
international organizations. Eac h of these futures also had parameter values attached to them – e.g. 
GDP growth per year, agricultural activity, area of newly developed land, and primary energy 
consumption. Each future was assumed to correspond to a particular SRES emissions scenario. 
Hall et al (2005) used these scenarios to assess the future flood risk in the UK. The socio -economic 
scenarios were represented in the model of flood risk by making assumptions about their effec t on a 
number of other variables. These included the standard of protection and the condition grade of the 
flood defen ces, the location of people and properties in the floodplain, the flood -depth damage 

[[PAGE 5]]
C3 - T.A / EFFICACITÉ GLOBALE / BMPs & GLOBAL EFFICIENCY 
4 
relationships, and social flood vulnerability indices. Makropoulos et al (2008) used the same futures to 
develop scenarios for urban water management. Here, the different futures were linked to vari ables 
such as water efficiency, stormwater management, and wa ter efficiency.  Similarly, Poussin et al 
(2012) used two coupled scenarios to consider flood risk in the River Meuse to investigate the benefits 
provided by semi -structural and non -structural adaptation strategies. Two climate scenarios were 
applied to the peak river discharge for different return pe riods, and two socio -economic scenarios, 
described as Global Economy and Regional Communities. The former was based on high economic 
and population growth, while the latter was based on lower economic and population growth, a 
regional focus, and stricter e nvironmental regulations. These drove a land -use model, and coupled 
with different climate change scenarios  Other examples where scenarios have been used in the field 
of water management, include scenarios on the quantity and quality of water resources (Krysanova et 
al., 2006; Alcamo et al., 2007) , wetlands (Harrison et al., 2008) , water supply (Barthel et al., 2010), 
and stormwater management (Semadeni-Davies et al., 2008).  
3 METHODOLOGY 
Based on the approach described in Moss et al . (2010), shared socio -economic pathways are be ing 
developed in the CORFU project that make common assumptions for use across the different case 
study cities. In order to make the CORFU case st udy cities comparable, t hese SSPs will form the 
basis for developing regional socio -economic scenarios in each city. Where urban growth is likely to 
be a significant driver, an urban growth model based on a cellular -automata model is applied. In this 
way, the scenarios can be associated with different future urban configurations. Regional drivers of 
urbanization are primarily determined by the statistical analysis of land use changes in the past. Apart 
from setting the overall growth rate, the influence of the shared pathways is expected to be rather 
small compared to the regional drivers of urbanization and the urban planning policies in each city. For 
this reason, the regional drivers and policies will be part of the scenario definition and act as addition al 
input parameters to the urban growth models in the form of spatial requirements and constraints. 
The socio -economic scenarios are to be combined with plausible climate future s. Climate futures 
describe the impact of increasing greenhouse gas emissions o n climate variables that have a direct 
influence on the flood hazard, e.g. changes in extreme precipitation, sea level rise , and storm surge 
levels. Projections of climate change variables have been conducted using Global Climate Models. 
Climate impact results for the AR5 Representative Concentration Pathways are not yet available. For 
this reason, climate futures will be based on the results of the 4th IPCC SRES (Nakicenovic et al., 
2000). As the SSPs are mostly driven by regional factors, they can easily be combined with a wide 
range of possible climate futures.  Several key challenges remain. The most important of these will be 
to downscale the results of global and regional climate models to the relevant city scale. However, the 
definition of climate futures is not i n the scope of this paper. Reference will be made to guidance on 
the use of climate inputs to urban flood models (DANVA, 2010; Paludan et al., 2010).  
Three or four scenarios are to be developed for each case study city based on the three shared socio-
economic pathways . These scenarios cover “interesting” aspects in the space of possible urban 
configurations and future climates. An interesting scenario is either very plausible (i.e. likely) or it has a 
high impact. One of the scenarios will be an extreme scenario based on the high growth pathway. 
3.1 Shared socio-economic pathways 
In the CORFU project, a set of three shared socio -economic pathways in the spirit of the AR5 has 
been defined for selected case study cities in 2050: a low, a medium and a hi gh growth pathway. The 
medium growth pathway represents a “business -as-usual” scenario with moderate population and 
GDP growth. It applies national growth paths as provided by th e Oxford Global Economic Model 
together with population growth rates according  to the IIASA “Middle of the Road” -Scenario (SSP2) 
(see Table 1). At the global level, it assumes a more or less linear growth path of population, while the 
economic growth rate resembles the long-term average annual growth rate since 1980. At the national 
level, country-specific long-term trends are taken into account.  The high and the low growth pathways 
allow for deviation from the medium growth pathway.  
The future socio -economic state of a city is affected by socio -economic developments on the global, 
the national, and the local level. Because a city shares the same institutional framework as all other 
regions within the same country, the socio -economic environment on the national level is of utmost 
importance for the future state of the city. Despite t he importance of national factors, the socio -
economic development within a country is usually marked by significant spatial disparities. In 
particular, large cities exhibit frequently a more dynamic economic development than less densely 

[[PAGE 6]]
NOVATECH 2013 
5 
populated areas. G eneral urbanization processes, as well as idiosyncratic characteristics of a city 
allow for significant deviations from the national socio-economic development. Thus, on the one hand, 
these regional pathways vary by assuming different growth paths on the n ational level. In particular, 
these assumptions concern population growth and economic growth by different industrial sectors as 
well as corresponding shifts towards a knowledge -based and service-oriented economy. On the other 
hand, the socio-economic pathways for the case study areas in this study account for region -specific 
drivers leading to a deviation from the socio-economic development on the national level. 
Table 1: Medium growth pathway population and GDP growth 
Population (Millions) 
  2010 2050 overall growth rate 
Bangladesh 148.9 194.4 31% 
China 1360.0 1300.7 -4% 
France 62.8 68.7 9% 
Germany 82.7 74.6 -10% 
India 1228.2 1624.1 32% 
S.Korea 48.9 47.1* -4% 
Spain 46.1 51.1 11% 
Taiwan 16.9 13.7 -19% 
World 6869.9 9285.3 35% 
*Year 2040. Source: Oxford Economics. Global Economic Model, 2012. 
Source: IIASA, SSP-Database, SSP2, 2012.  
GDP, constant prices and exchange rates (US$, Billions, 2005 prices) 
  2010 2040 annual growth rate 
China 960.1 6440.8 6.6% 
France 550.9 869.1 1.5% 
Germany 735.7 1069.3 1.3% 
India 303.3 2156.3 6.8% 
S. Korea 254.8 673.5 3.3% 
Spain 295.7 442.8 1.4% 
Taiwan 111.6 277.4 3.1% 
World 12708.1 33112.2 3.2% 
Data for Bangladesh are not provided individually by Oxford Economics.  
Source: Oxford Economics. Global Economic Model, 2012.  
In all SSPs a relatively strong growth of the regional population is connected with a relatively high 
growth rate of total GDP in the corresponding region. First, we assume positive effects of an 
increasing population on the local a ggregate demand for goods and services (the so -called home -
market effect). This and a relatively large supply of (skilled) labo ur raise the attractiveness of a city for 
firms. Simultaneously, relatively high incomes and better job opportunities attract workers to migrate to 
the city. Cities usually attract a large proportion of young and skilled people. At the same time, their 
economies are often marked by a high share of knowledge -based and service -oriented businesses. 
Therefore, the economic success of a city is frequently associated with its relative attractiveness for 
skilled workers, which helps maintaining a high level of competitiveness. Beside the possibility of 
receiving a high income and good job opportunities, so -called “soft location factors”, su ch as the 
quality of the infrastructure of education and child care, the quality of housing, the city’s cultural 
offerings, and opportunities for leisure time activities, play an important role in the city’s attractiveness 

[[PAGE 7]]
C3 - T.A / EFFICACITÉ GLOBALE / BMPs & GLOBAL EFFICIENCY 
6 
for migrants. If such positive ag glomeration effects outweigh possible negative effects, such as 
pollution, crowding, or high land prices, the city will exhibit above average growth resulting in 
increasing level of urbanization. 
The CORFU case study cities are highly heterogeneous. On the  one hand, there are cities in highly 
developed countries, e.g. Barcelona, Hamburg, and Nice, exhibiting a high level of wealth and 
relatively low dynamics in terms of population and GDP growth. On the other hand, there are very 
rapidly growing cities in d eveloping and emerging countries, e.g. Beijing, Dhaka, and Mumbai, which 
are marked by relatively weak institutions and extremely high social inequalities. Thus, the creation of 
SSPs requires individual consideration of each case study area. However, gener al narrative storylines 
have been specified that represent a qualitative assessment of the assumptions shared by the 
scenarios in all case study cities. The SSPs are regionalized in each case study city  by variation of 
driving parameters in a model for the regional economic growth. The parameters to be modified in this 
model incorporate the regional population growth, the education level, as well as deviations from 
national trends in GDP and sector structure. 
The population projections will be used explicit ly as an input to the urban growth model, which is 
described in the next subsection, Increases in GDP will be linked directly with the flood impact model 
to drive the changes in exposed assets. 
3.2 Urban configuration 
By the application of a spatially distributed urban growth model for each scenario, a range of possible 
future urban configurations can be generated. The scenarios consist of three main ingredients: a 
narrative storyline, quantitative trends, and policies and plans. The urban growth scenarios and 
subsequent land use distributions are primarily based on extrapolation of past urban development 
trends. Using algorithms that analyse past spatial trends, land use transition rules are calculated that 
develop future land based on suitability. This extrapolation provides a spatially explicit business -as-
usual scenario for urban growth that can act as a baseline from which alternative scenarios are 
developed and assessed. The applied growth rate is determined from ti me-series data and can be 
adjusted by introducing the scenario -based quantitative trends. These primarily consist of population 
predictions that fall behind or exceed those observed during the base years the model is calibrated on. 
Future growth can theref ore be dampened or boosted without changing the intrinsic rules underlying 
the land use transitions. 
Narrative stories on the other hand are implemented as top down information, therefore adjusting the 
suitability for land use changes in specific locations  or land use classes. Implementing an active 
protection scheme for green areas for instance, would prevent the transition from forests, shrubs or 
other land use classes related to green zones into built -up areas. Flood risk adverse behavio ur by 
future would influence the suitability for the occupation of floodplains. Such narrative stories can be 
implemented as deterministic or probabilistic. In the latter case, unsuitable areas could still be 
occupied in case the growth pressure is sufficiently high. Polic ies and plans are often expressed as 
zoning plans including a set of excluded areas where no urban development is permitted. Within the 
urban growth model these mainly act as “development envelopes ”; zones where the suitability for 
specific land use transformations (e.g. from barren land to residential) is artificially increased. In 
combination with the derived rule sets that for instance define suitability based on the proximity to 
major infrastructure, such envelopes gradually fill up depending on the defined growth rates. Excluded 
areas on the other hand simply remain static; no land use changes are taking place.  
Together, these instruments provide an expressive toolset where quantitative and qualitative storylines 
are translated into actual spatial development. Changes in land -use will be used as inputs to the 
hydraulic model, which will reflect changes in the impervious areas. Changes in land -use types will 
also directly be linked with the flood impact model to describe the distribution of exposed assets.  
3.3 Coping, adaptive capacity, and resilience 
In order to be able to assess the resilience of a city to flooding in the future, it is necessary to specify 
socio-economic indicators for coping and adaptive c apacity in the scenarios. On the regional scale, 
coping and adaptive capacity is influenced by the establishment of mitigation goals and their 
enforcement through policies and plans.  Examples of policies and plans that increase the capacity on 
a regional s cale include flood maps, evacuation plans, early warning systems, flood insurance or 
recovery plans, and incentives for private adaptation. On the local or community scale, three socio-
economic variables have been identified that determine  the coping and adaptive capacity: awareness, 
relationships, and livelihoods. 

[[PAGE 8]]
NOVATECH 2013 
7 
Awareness is the collective social perception that a community has of the flood risk they are exposed 
to. Factors that influence the awareness include the a vailability of information related to f lood risk, 
policies, and plans , education on current flood risk and preparedness , as well as experience and 
legacy of flooding.  Relationships represent the key links and interactions that exist between 
individuals, communities and government agents; these linkages create avenues of cooperation and 
communication, and are essential support systems in emergencies.  Livelihood is seen as the means 
by which individuals or communities obtain the resources that sustain their daily existences. It refers to 
the availability and accessibility of f inancial, human, and physical resources  to the local communities, 
a health care system, welfare support, and private flood insurance. 
The drivers and pressures derived from the scenarios will be used as inputs to hydraulic mod els, 
which will alter the intensity, extent and frequency of flooding. The impacts of this flooding will be 
assessed using a flood damage model, which will include direct damage to property, traffic disruptions 
and impacts on human health. Several events will be assessed for each scenario in order to calculate 
the Expected Annual Damage (EAD).  Finally, different flood management strategies or resilience 
measures will be examined, to assess their effectiveness under different scenarios, thus completing 
the DPSIR chain. 
4 EXAMPLE OF SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT AND ITS APPLICATION IN A 
CASE STUDY CITY 
The methodology described above was applied to the case study city of Hamburg, Germany. The city 
of Hamburg is the second -largest city in Germany located at the Elbe estua ry. Two study areas, 
Wilhelmsburg and Wandse, shown in Figure 1, were chosen as they represent the two dominant flood 
typologies in Hamburg.  
 
Figure 1 – Map of the two study sites within the Metropolitan Region of Hamburg, Germany 
Wilhelmsburg is an island in the River Elbe,  and is primarily at risk of flooding due to storm surges. It 
has an area of 35km 2, and is protected by a 24km long dike ring. A st orm surge event with strong 
impacts occurred in 1962. Several dike breaches led to a flood disaster affecting wide parts of 
Wilhelmsburg with more than 300 casualties and causing an overall damage of € 350 Mio (Gönnert et 
al., 2012). In contrast, Wandse is a small catchment, with an area of 88km2. The Wandse catchment is 
highly urbanized in its lower reaches , and is at risk from pluvial and fluvial flooding . Extreme rainfall 
events in Summer 2002 caused an overall damage in Hamburg of more than € 15 Mio (Pasche et al., 
2008). 
In the first step to develop scenarios for Hamburg, the shared low, medium, and high growth SSPs 
described above had to be regionalized. A regional economic growth model employing the national 


[[PAGE 9]]
C3 - T.A / EFFICACITÉ GLOBALE / BMPs & GLOBAL EFFICIENCY 
8 
population and GDP projections for Germany (see Table 1) was set up for this purpose. The main 
driving parameters of this model were identified by a regression analysis of cross-sectional time-series 
(panel) data of regional employment and productivity by different economic sectors in the past. The 
model was used to generate projections of population and GDP in the three SSPs. For 2050, and f or 
the low, medium, and h igh growth pathways, future populations of: 1.735, 1.828, and 1.918 million, 
and a future GDP of 1.00, 1.19, and 1.40 billion Euros (in 2005 prices) , have been obtained, 
respectively. The three population projections for Hamburg are shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2 - Population projections for Hamburg for low, medium and high growth scenarios 
The developed growth scenarios for Hamburg are in accordance with the SSPs. A coherent narrative 
was written to explain detailed developments in each scenario. In the low growth scenario, the 
population declines resulting in a declining land use. There is a trend towards motorized private 
transport and a decrease in public transport, especially in the outskirts. An increasing number of single 
person households create the demand for a diversity of housing types. New residential buildings are 
constructed in open spaces to meet this demand, in spite of a large number of other vacant buildings. 
Some of these new buildings are located in areas subject to flooding. There is a small number of 
private protection measures, but, due to low public budgets, governmental adaptation measures are at 
a minimum, focused on storm surges, and education on the risk of flooding is sparse. 
The high growth scenario entails a rising population, a high housing demand, and a densification of 
central urban areas. At large, there is a l oss of open space. Nevertheless, the environmental 
awareness and the willingness to adapt to a changing climate are high. There are governmental 
subsidy programs for private adaptation and large -scale infrastructural projects may be undertaken to 
mitigate or compensate negative effects as a result of sealing pervious areas. The medium growth 
scenario is in between the low and high growth pathways. Finally, in all scenarios, the level of 
protection from storm surges of the river Elbe is targeted to be the sa me as today, i.e. a storm event 
with a rec urrence interval of 1,000 to 10, 000 year (depending on the statistical approach), which, in 
2050, corresponds to a maximum expected water level of NN + 8.10 m above sea level in Hamburg 
(Gönnert et al., 2012). 
Based on these general scenario narratives, more comprehensive and quantitative scenario 
parameters have to be specified in the two study areas. An urban growth model has been applied in 
order to derive structural land use changes in the Wandse area. Addition ally, the anticipated changes 
inherent to certain land use types, such as densification of detached housing or protection of green 
areas, have been discussed in Fink and Klostermann (2012). They also investigated  the potential for 
implementing sustainable drainage systems (SUDS) in the Wandse area, i.e. green roofs, swales, an d 
infiltration ditches. The capacity to deploy such measures is to be determined by scenario parameters. 
Detailed plans are being prepared and the mitigation effects of different combinations of SUDS are to 
be tested by hydrological model runs. In a small number of focus areas selected for this purpose, we 
also examine the effects of decentralized stormwater retention by multi-purpose areas. 


[[PAGE 10]]
NOVATECH 2013 
9 
In the Wilhelmsburg study area, a slightly different approach is taken. The International Building 
Exhibition (IBA) has published the “Future Concept Renewable Wilhelmsburg” (IBA, 2010). They show 
prototypical development areas at different time steps until 2050. These plans are regarded to be 
future land use projections and will be used to determine the change in expected annual damages in 
the event of different extreme storm surges. The events to be investigated have been designed in the 
XtremRisK project (Oumeraci et al., 2009). All storm surges exceed the existing level of protection and 
lead to dike failure around the island of Wilhelmsburg. The flooding process of the hinterland was 
simulated using a hydrodynamic flood model. Based  on the available flood maps, the future flood risk 
under the IBA scenario and with different timings of resilience measures will be determined. 
5 CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has described how in the CORFU project, socio -economic scenarios will be developed as 
part of a DPSIR framework, to assess the changing pattern of flood risk in case study cities. The 
changes in flood risk will be assessed through the hydraulic modelling, and changes in the flood  
extents, intensities and frequencies. The impacts of the result ing floods will be assessed. Resilience 
strategies are being developed, and will be assessed to evaluate their effectiveness under different 
futures. This research will e nable flood managers and planners to plan for uncertain futures, and to 
implement strategies that will make their cities more resilient to flooding. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Research on the CORFU (Collaborative research on flood resilie nce in urban areas) project was 
funded by the European Commission through Framework Programme 7, Grant Number 244047. 
 
LIST OF REFERENCES 
Alcamo, J., Floerke, M., Maerker, M., 2007. Future long-term changes in global water resources driven by   socio -
economic and climatic changes. Hydrol. Sci. J. 52, 247–275. 
Arnbjerg-Nielsen, K., 2006. Significant climate change of extreme rainfall in Denmark. Wat.Sci.& Tech. 54, (6/7), 
1-8. 
Barthel, R., Janisch, S., Nickel, D., Trifkovic, A., Hoerhan, T., 2010. Using the Multiactor -Approach in Glowa -
Danube to Simulate Decisions for   the Water Supply Sector Under Conditions of Gl obal Climate Change. 
Water Resour. Manag. 24, 239–275. 
DANVA, 2010. En kogebog for analyser af klimaændringers effekter på afløbssystemer – med fokus på 
oversvømmelser, F&U rapport nr. 5, Dansk Vand - og Spildevandsforening ISBN: 87 -90455-74-6. Available in 
English under the title: ”Urban Climate Change Guidelines - How to achieve sustainable adaptation in urban 
areas” January 2012 by DHI, 2012. 
Djordjević, S., Butler, D., Gourbesville, P., Mark, O., Pasche, E., 2011. New policies to deal with climate change  
and other drivers impacting on resilience to flooding in urban areas: the CORFU approach. Environmental 
Science & Policy. 14(7), 864-870 
Field, C.B., Barros, V., Stocker, T.F., Qin, D., Dokken, D.J., Ebi, K.L., Mastrandrea, M.D., Mach, K.J., Plattner, 
G.K., Allen, S.K., et al, 2012. Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change 
adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA. 
Fink, J., Klostermann, N., 2012. Stadt im (Klima -)Wandel. Anpassungsmöglicheiten städtischer Strukturtypen an 
die Folgen des Klimawandels , [German]. [The c ity in (climate) chan ge - adaptation opportunities for urban 
structure types to the impacts of climate change].  Diploma Thesis, Hafen City University, Hamburg, Germany. 
Gersonius, B., Ashley, R., Pathirana, A., Zevenbergen, C., 2010. Managing the flooding system’s resiliency to 
climate change. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers-Engineering Sustainability 163, 15–22. 
Gönnert, G., Gerkensmeier, B., Müller,J. -M., 2012. Ermittlung des Sturmflutbemessungswasserstandes für den 
öffentlichen Hochwasserschutz in Hamburg. Berichte des Landesbetriebes Straßen, Brücken und Gewässer  
12 . 
Hall, J.W., Sayers, P.B., Dawson, R.J., 2005. National -scale assessment of current and future flood risk in 
England and Wales. Natural Hazards 36, 147–164. 
Harrison, P.A., Berry, P.M., Henriques, C., Holman, I.P., 2008. Impacts of socio -economic and climate change 
scenarios on wetlands: linking water resource and biodiversity meta-models. Clim. Change 90, 113–139. 
IBA, 2010. Energy Atlas. Future Concept: Renewable Wilhelmsburg. Jovis Verlag, Hamburg. 
Jongman, B., Ward, P.J., Aerts , J.C.J.H., 2012. Global exposure to river and coastal flooding: Long term trends 

[[PAGE 11]]
C3 - T.A / EFFICACITÉ GLOBALE / BMPs & GLOBAL EFFICIENCY 
10 
and changes. Global Environmental Change. 22(4), 823-835. 
Kriegler, E., O’Neill, B.C., Hallegatte, S., Kram, T., Lempert, R.J., Moss, R.H., Wilbanks, T., 2012. The need for 
and use of socio -economic scenarios for climate change analysis: A new approach based on shared socio -
economic pathways. Global Environmental Change 22, 807–822. 
Krysanova, V., Kundzewicz, Z.W., Pinskwar, I., Habeck, A., Hattermann, F., 2006. Regional socio -economic and 
environmental changes and their impacts onwater resources on example of Odra and Elbe basins. Water 
Resour. Manag. 20, 607–641. 
Makropoulos, C.K., Memon, F.A., Shirley -Smith, C., Butler, D., 2008. Futures: an exploration of scenarios for 
sustainable urban water management. Water Policy 10, 345–373. 
Mark, O., Djordjevic, S., 2006. While waiting for the next flood in your city, in: 7th International Conference on 
Hydroinformatics. Nice, France. 
Merz, B., Hall, J., Disse, M., Schumann, A., 2010. Fluvial flood risk management in a changing world. Natural 
Hazards and Earth System Sciences 10, 509–527. 
Moss, R.H., Edmonds, J.A., Hibbard, K.A., Manning, M.R., Rose, S.K., Vuuren, D.P. van, Carter, T.R., Emori, S., 
Kainuma, M., Kram, T., Meehl, G.A., Mi tchell, J.F.B., Nakicenovic, N., Riahi, K., Smith, S.J., Stouffer, R.J., 
Thomson, A.M., Weyant, J.P., Wilbanks, T.J., 2010. The next generation of scenarios for climate change 
research and assessment. Nature 463, 747–756. 
Nakicenovic, N., Alcamo, J., Davis , G., de Vries, B., Fenhann, J., Gaffin, S., Gregory, K., Grubler, A., Jung, T.Y., 
Kram, T., 2000. Special report on emissions scenarios: a special report of Working Group III of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Pacific Northwest National Lab oratory, Richland, WA (US), 
Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (US). 
Oumeraci, H., Jensen, J., Gönnert, G., Pasche, E., Kortenhaus, A., Naulin, M., Wahl, T., Thumm, S., Ujeyl, G., 
Gershovich, I., Burzel, A., 2009. Flood risk analysis for a megacit y: The German XtremRisK project. Road 
Map towards a Flood Resilient Urban Environment. Paris, France. 
Paludan, B., Brink -Kjær, A., Nielsen, N.H., Linde, J. J., Jensen, L.N., Mark, O. , 2010  Climate change 
management in drainage systems – A “Climate Cookbook” for adapting to climate changes. Novatech, France 
2010. 
Parry, M.L., Canziani, O.F., Palutikof, J.P., van der Linden, P.J., Hanson, C.E., 2007. IPCC, 2007: Climate 
change 2007: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of working group II to the fourth assessment 
report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Parson, E.A., 2008. Useful global -change scenarios: current issues and c hallenges. Environmental Research 
Letters 3, 045016. 
Pasche, E., Manojlovic, N., Behzadnia, N., 2008. Floods in Small Urban Catchments: Hydrological Sensitivity, 
Risk Assessment and Efficient Integrative Strategies of Mitigation. 11th International Confere nce on Urban 
Drainage (ICUD 2008), Edinburgh, UK. 
Peterson, T.C., Zhang, X., Brunet -India, M., Vázquez -Aguirre, J.L., 2008. Changes in North American extremes 
derived from daily weather data. J. Geophys. Res 113, D07113. 
Poussin, J.K., Bubeck, P., Aerts, J ., Ward, P.J., 2012. Potential of semi -structural and non -structural adaptation 
strategies to reduce future flood risk: case study for the Meuse. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci 12, 3455–3471. 
Schelfaut, K., Pannemans, B., van der Craats, I., Krywkow, J., Mys iak, J., Cools, J., 2011. Bringing flood 
resilience into practice: the FREEMAN project. Environmental Science & Policy 14, 825–833. 
Semadeni-Davies, A., Hernebring, C., Svensson, G., Gustafsson, L.-G., 2008. The impacts of climate change and 
urbanisation on drainage in Helsingborg, Sweden: Combined sewer system. J. Hydrol. 350, 100–113. 
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs/Population Division, 2012. World Urbanization 
Prospects: The 2011 Revision. United Nations, New York. 