[[PAGE 1]]
Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Ecological Indicators
j o ur na l ho me page:  www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolind
Will income inequality affect environmental quality? Analysis based
on
 China’s provincial panel data
Yu Hao a,b,c,∗, Heyin Chen b, Qianxue Zhang b
a Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
b School of Management and Economics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China
c Collaborative Innovation Center of Electric Vehicles in Beijing, Beijing 100081, China
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received
 12 November 2015
Received
 in revised form 6 March 2016
Accepted
 12 March 2016
Available
 online 25 April
 2016
Keywords:
Carbon
 emissions per capita
Income
 inequality
Provincial
 panel data
China
a b s t r a c t
During the last two decades of China’s rapid economic growth, the gap in citizens’ income has widened
and
 environmental quality has deteriorated. Using Gini coefﬁcients  as the measure of income inequality,
this study investigated the impacts of income inequality on carbon emissions per capita in China. To
control
 for potential endogeneity and allow for dynamics, the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM)
technique is utilized. Moreover, the inﬂuential  factors that can affect carbon emissions per capita in
China
 have been examined. The empirical results indicate that carbon emissions per capita increase as
the income gap expands for nationwide and in the eastern and non-eastern regions of China. Among all
factors
 that may affect carbon emissions per capita, a “U”  shaped relationship exists between per capita
income and per capita carbon emissions, and increasing the value-added share of secondary industry in
the
 GDP would signiﬁcantly  increase carbon emissions per capita.
© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Since
 the period of economic reform the late 1970s, China’s
economy has achieved rapid development. In the meantime, the
sharp increase in China’s energy consumption and carbon diox-
ide emissions has become a signiﬁcant  problem that has attracted
domestic and foreign attention. According to World Development
Indicators 2006, 16 of the world’s 20 most polluted cities are located
in China. In recent years, serious haze and fog pollution has plagued
large areas of northern and eastern China, which reﬂects  the fact
that air pollution has become one of the most crucial environ-
mental issues in China. China’s environmental deterioration and
vulnerability has seriously threatened the physical and psycholog-
ical health of Chinese citizens and has exerted a negative impact
on China’s international image (Zhang and Hao, 2016). According
to statistics from the Oak Ridge National Laboratory Carbon Diox-
ide Information Analysis Center (CDIAC), China has become the
world’s largest CO2 emitter since 2008, with carbon emissions in
2012 accounting for approximately 25% of the global greenhouse
gas emissions. Consequently, China has been under tremendous
∗ Corresponding author at: School of Management and Economics, Beijing Insti-
tute
 of Technology, Beijing 100081, China. Tel.: +86 1068914938.
E-mail
 addresses: haoyuking@gmail.com (Y. Hao), 1009785049@qq.com
(H. Chen), 626222617@qq.com (Q. Zhang).
pressure from the international community to control carbon emis-
sions and to improve environmental quality. In recent years, China’s
government has made a great effort to sustain energy conservation
and reduce emissions, making several speciﬁc  and ambitious com-
mitments. For example, China’s State Council declared in 2009 that
China was set to cut carbon intensity (the carbon emissions as a
percentage of GDP) by 40–45%  by 2020 based on the 2006 level. In
November 2014, in a joint statement on climate change by China
and the United States, Chinese president Xi Jinping promised to
achieve China’s peak CO2 emissions by 2030 and raise the share
of non-fossil fuels in primary energy consumption to approxi-
mately 20%.1 Impressive and systematic changes may occur in
China following this series of energy saving measures and emis-
sion reductions being carried out as well as the optimization and
adjustment of China’s economic and social structure.
Due to China’s rapid economic development, its economic
and social structure is undergoing drastic changes, including
the expansion of the regional income gap and the unbalance
of the distribution pattern. Galor and Moav (2004) theorized
that the widening income gap was not conducive to sustain-
able economic development. Therefore, building a well-off society
and rejuvenating China requires narrowing the income gap and
1 For reference, see http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/11/12/china-usa-
climatechange-idUKL3N0T17FC20141112.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.03.025
1470-160X/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

[[PAGE 2]]
534 Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542
alleviating the unfair distribution of income. China is currently
facing major challenges in reducing energy consumption, energy
conservation and emission reduction to guarantee more reasonable
and fair economic development.
Protecting the environment and narrowing the income gap
are signiﬁcant  issues on which China will focus for some time
to come. Do the two issues share a degree of correlation? The
relationship between income gap and environmental pollution
raises two questions: (1) Whether the widening income gap would
lead to detrimental impacts on environmental quality; if yes, how
would it affect the environmental quality and what consequences
would cause. (2) Whether the income gap will inﬂuence  economic
development and thus aggravate environmental pollution as the
economy grows or weaken environmental governance through
economic adjustments. Domestic and foreign scholars have studied
the relationship between income gap, economic development, and
environmental pollution, but they have not yet reached a conclu-
sion.
Therefore, this study’s main contributions include: (1) using
the GMM method rather than the unconventional ﬁxed  effects
method for measurement, which can control endogeneity and
involve dynamic effects; (2) using provincial panel data to analyze
how income inequality would affect pollution emissions in China;
(3) verifying this relationship in different regions with regional
discrepancies considered.
To overcome various deﬁciencies  in the previous analyses
of their relationship, we carefully choose appropriate methods
for empirical analysis and prove the stability of results through
the study of different regression speciﬁcations.  For example, to
examine the inﬂuence  of economic development and regional eco-
nomic disparity on carbon emissions, we overcome the potential
deﬁciencies  of multinational data by using China domestic data
and systematically measuring the carbon emissions of Chinese
provinces. We infer the calculation formula for the Gini coefﬁcient
by calculating the provincial-level Gini coefﬁcients  from 1995 to
2010 using Tian’s (2012) methodology and assuming that Lorenz
curves refer to the ratio of the area between the line of equality
and the Lorenz curve over the area of perfect equality of incomes.
We use the formula to measure and calculate the Gini coefﬁcients
of incomes of rural and urban residents in provincial regions from
2011 to 2012. Then, we use the grouping weighting method to cal-
culate the Gini coefﬁcient  of residents’ total incomes in provinces
(cities, districts) from 2011 to 2012. This method yields complete
panel data with compatible, comparable calculations, using provin-
cial regions from 1995 to 2012 as basic indexes, which allows us
to empirically examine the inﬂuence  of regional income gaps on
carbon emissions. To fully introduce dynamic factors into our quan-
titative analysis of the relationship, we use the GMM method to
verify their relationship except for the ﬁxed  effects estimates of
standard static panel data. Meanwhile, considering the differences
of carbon emissions in northern, central and western regions, we
adopt both national and regional data to analyze the inﬂuences
of carbon emissions and identify variables such as GDP per capita,
regional Gini coefﬁcients,  industrial structure, energy intensity and
the urbanization level as explanatory variables for China’s car-
bon emissions. We then focus further on the inﬂuence  of regional
income differences on carbon emissions to offer policy suggestions
for environmental protection and economic development in differ-
ent regions. Selecting proper regression methods and speciﬁcations
validates the credibility of our empirical results and guarantees the
rationality of the corresponding policy recommendations.
The remainder of this study is organized as follows: Section
2 brieﬂy  reviews the relevant literature. Section 3 introduces the
theoretical models explaining the possible relationships between
income inequality and environmental quality, and Section 4
describes the data source and methods of empirical analysis.
Section 5 presents the empirical estimation results and the cor-
responding analysis. Section 6 concludes the study and describes
several policy implications.
2. Literature review
The relationship between economic development and environ-
mental pollution was mainly based on the Environment Kuznets
Curve (EKC) hypothesis. This hypothesis posits the existence of
an “inverted-U”  shaped relationship between economic develop-
ment and environmental pollution, that is to say, in an early
stage of economic development, the environmental quality was
deteriorating steadily with the increase of per capita income. How-
ever, when the income level reached a certain turning point, the
increase of income would positively inﬂuence  environmental qual-
ity. The previous analyses mainly focused on economic growth
and the increase of per capita income, but paid insufﬁcient  atten-
tion to the pattern of economic development. To further explore
the relationship between economic development and environmen-
tal pollution, income distribution, as another aspect of economic
development, should also be included in the analysis. In terms of
income distribution, the relationship between income gaps and
economic growth had long attracted scholars’ interest. Theoreti-
cally, although income gaps might contribute to economic growth
at an early stage, it would curb economic growth that reached a
certain level.2
Several scholars have recently empirically tested EKC hypothe-
sis. Their research can be divided into two categories based on their
conclusions: (1) studies that verify the inﬂuence  of income inequal-
ity on environmental pollution by examining the existence of the
EKC, including Torras and Boyce (1998), Grossman and Krueger
(1991), Shaﬁk  and Bandyopadhyay (1992), Selden and Song (1994),
Panayotou (1993), Coondoo and Dinda (2002), John and Pecchenino
(1994), Shao et al. (2011), and Golley and Meng (2012). They
conducted empirical studies on the relationship between differ-
ent environmental pollution indicators and economic growth as
well as income gaps, respectively. Their research proved the exist-
ence of EKC and found that the constantly widening income gap
affected environmental quality. For example, Torras and Boyce
(1998) focused on environmental policies and adopted indicators of
water quality provided by 287 observation stations in 58 countries
and observable air quality indicators of 18–52  cities in 19–42
countries. By detecting seven different types of pollution variables,
they empirically proved that income inequality would lead to envi-
ronmental degradation. By employing models using sulfur dioxide,
smoke and dust as indicators of environmental quality, they
discovered that widening income gaps and the degradation of envi-
ronmental quality coexist in low income countries, which paves the
way for studies about the relationship between income inequal-
ity and environmental pollution. In similar studies, Grossman and
Krueger (1994), Shaﬁk  and Bandyopadhyay (1992) and Selden and
Song (1994) also found that income inequality would lead to devi-
ation from environmental policies. Rich people, who often had
more political power, only considered economic costs and bene-
ﬁts,  whereas the terrible environmental cost was mostly borne by
the poor, who accounted for most of the population; such envi-
ronmental policies would aggravate pollution. Because everyone
2 Except for examining the existence of EKC, some other aspects of the relationship
between
 environmental quality/energy consumption and the economic develop-
ment
 have also been investigated. For instance, some researchers examined the
causality
 between environmental quality/energy consumption and the economic
development
 (e.g., Wang et al., 2011; Zhang, 2011), some studies examine the so-
called
 “decoupling  effects” or “rebound  effects” of energy consumption and related
CO2 emissions (e.g., Zhang and Da, 2015; Zhang et al., 2015).

[[PAGE 3]]
Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542  535
produced or consumed products containing emission pollutants,
Ravallion et al. (2000) studied the relationship between income
inequality and environmental quality by constructing a demand
function of carbon emissions that were individual and based on
income. If the poor had a much higher (lower) marginal propen-
sity to emit, the policies used to reduce income inequality might
increase (decrease) carbon emissions. It is assumed that the poo-
rest people had a much higher marginal propensity to emit than the
richest because low-carbon products tended to have much higher
technical requirements and thus often had higher prices that the
poorest people could not afford. Moreover, the poor compared
were more likely than the rich to use inefﬁcient  energy prod-
ucts, which included a much higher marginal propensity to emit.
Martinez-Alier (1995) analyzed the inﬂuence  of income inequal-
ity on environmental quality from the perspective of supply and
demand. In terms of demand, he divided environmental goods into
environmental luxuries and environmental necessities (such as
drinking water). Because the former had much higher income elas-
ticity, redistribution of income would affect the quantity of these
two environmental goods that the public demanded. The equal-
ization of income distribution would increase people’s demand for
environmental necessities and thus could reduce the demand for
environmental luxuries, which could improve the basic environ-
mental and living conditions. In terms of supply, because many
environmental goods were subject to cost, redistribution of income
would change the supply of environmental goods on the market.
Martinez-Alier (1995) argues that “the  poor sell cheap products,”
meaning they are more inclined to underestimate the value of envi-
ronmental goods compared with other goods due to the lack of
environmental goods on any market. Magnani (2000) found that
a larger income gap would reduce people’s concern about and
cooperation toward the environment. Using the middleman theory
system, he demonstrated that expanding the income gap would
aggravate environmental pollution by reducing the earnings of
intermediaries and the consumption of environmentally friendly
products, which indirectly supported Boyce’s (1994) argument.
Ravallion et al. (2000) probed the relationship between pollutant
emissions and income distribution. They thought that the process
of income redistribution from poverty to prosperity would increase
the pollutant emissions, and they described a trade-off between
income equality and environmental quality. They found a concave
shaped relationship between pollutants exhausted and economic
growth. Their research detected a negative correlation between
the intensity of emissions and income elasticity of most goods;
articles that had higher income elasticity were usually goods that
produced fewer pollutant emissions and vice versa. This ﬁnding
suggests that increased income would shift consumption of goods
containing highly polluting materials to consumption of goods con-
taining low polluting materials. Based on the properties of the
concave function, substitutional relations between income equal-
ity and pollution emissions would weaken in the long run. Bimonte
(2002) used the multinational cross-section data from 35 European
countries as samples, which reﬂected  income distribution by Gini
coefﬁcient,  and measured the environmental protection condition
of a country by the proportion of conservation areas in national ter-
ritorial areas. The results revealed a negative correlation between
income inequality and environmental protection. He further indi-
cated that more equal income distribution would bend the EKC
left, that is, in an environment with relatively equal income dis-
tribution, the EKC turning point will be achieved at a much lower
income level. Shao et al. (2011) also veriﬁed  that inverted-N shaped
relationship between energy-related industrial CO2 emissions and
GDP per capita in Shanghai city of China. Meanwhile, other stud-
ies, such as Scruggs (1998) and Ravallion et al. (2000) argued that
no necessary relationship exists between income inequality and
environmental pollution on the basis of EKC theory. Using panel
data from 19 countries to associate environmental protection with
income increase, Scruggs (1998) found that the rich would be more
concerned about environmental quality. Ravallion et al. (2000)
argued that the widening income gap between countries and inside
some countries would lower carbon emissions at any given income
level.
Another large category of empirical studies examined the rela-
tionship between income inequality and environmental quality
based on refuting the EKC theory. With the increase of availabil-
ity of data and the evolution of metering methods, the relationship
between environmental pollution indicators and economic growth
appears to be more complicated. For example, Perman and Stern
(1999, 2003) and Aslanidis and Iranzo (2009), respectively, estab-
lished panel data models to conduct empirical studies and found
no inverted “U”  shaped relationship between environmental pol-
lution and economic growth predicated by the EKC theory. Ample
evidence demonstrated that standard EKC models were too sim-
plistic to sufﬁciently  accommodate variables that helped explain
pollutant emission levels. Different samples or measurement mod-
els to determine and locate turning points in the various types of
pollutant emissions yielded different conclusions. Auffhammer and
Carson (2008) concluded that CO2 emissions per capita in China, the
largest developing country, would increase continuously with the
growth of GDP per capita. Magnani (2000) considered the degree
of income inequality using Gini coefﬁcients  and price-to-income of
the lowest and highest income stratiﬁcations  through analysis of
the measures establishment of public policies for environmental
protection and used data from Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) member countries from 1980
to 1991. He also analyzed environmental protection efforts of one
country by examining public expenditure for research related to
environmental protection and included cross terms of per capita
income and indicators for income inequality in empirical mod-
els. The empirical research had indicated a negative correlation
between Gini coefﬁcients  and environmental protection expendi-
ture per capita, excluding cross terms. In random effects models
that considered time trends, when per capita income reached
11,400 USD, the net effects between the price-to-income of lowest
and highest income stratiﬁcations  and environmental protection
expenditures per capita were positive, with cross terms included.
The reversal of the relationship between per capita income and
environment protection expenditure per capita was subject to
income distribution. Under average price-to-income, the turning
point would appear when per capita income reached 14,000 USD,
which was higher than the estimated results (10,526 USD) with
cross terms excluded. This ﬁnding  indicated that if the economic
growth in high-income countries was accompanied by decreasing
income inequality, the preference of public consumption for pri-
vate goods would turn to consumption of public goods (such as
environmental goods); if, and only if, income increase did not pro-
duce substantial income inequality could the declining stage of EKC
be realized. However, in most developing countries, the widening
income gap trend would be enhanced with the income increase.
He argued that income distribution was more inﬂuential  than
average income on the realization of growth paths of sustainable
development in high-income countries. Scruggs (1998) conducted
empirical tests on information from the database of Global Envi-
ronmental Monitoring System (GEMS) and the multinational data
samples of 17 OECD member countries. The results indicated that
the relationship between Gini coefﬁcients  used to reﬂect  income
equality and environmental quality was uncertain. Analysis of
the former group of samples had revealed that income inequality
only had a signiﬁcant  negative relationship with the underwater
oxygen content and aerial solid particles. Analysis of the latter
group of samples was also uncertain except for a signiﬁcant  pos-
itive correlation between income inequality and environmental

[[PAGE 4]]
536 Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542
Environme ntal 
 pollu/g415o n
Vf(Y)
E2 
⎯E
E1 
Income levelY1 ⎯Y Y2
EKC
Fig. 1. The relationship between income levels and environmental quality in an
“inverted-U”
 shaped curve.
quality in a group of speciﬁc  regression equations. However, that
relationship was not statistically signiﬁcant  in other regression
equations. Gawande et al. (2001) empirically analyzed the rela-
tionship between American household income and toxic waste
storage sites. The research indicated that under the EKC relation-
ship, rich families would live far from sources of pollution. People
who became rich were more inclined to move from polluted areas
rather than inﬂuence  public policies for reducing pollutant emis-
sions. To some extent, this veriﬁed  the argument of Boyce (1994)
that income inequality would affect people’s time preference for
environmental utilization. Studies by Torras and Boyce (1998) and
Boyce (2010) have demonstrated that people’s requirements for
the environment should be combined with their purchasing power
and buying inclination. In this case, purchasing power referred to
a realistic restraint for environmental concerns, and buying incli-
nation referred to subjective restraint for environmental concerns.
Income inequality differentiated the purchasing power of people
from different income groups. When the income gap was widening,
low-income groups were more likely to overuse natural resources
to generate income, which would intensify environmental destruc-
tion; whereas high-income groups were inclined to move to areas
with lower environmental risks, and their willingness-to-pay for
environmental management was low. Therefore, with the widening
of the income gap, the willingness-to-pay on environment was low
for both low-income groups and high-income groups, which aggra-
vated environmental pollution. All this evidence veriﬁed  that the
EKC did not exist. However, very few studies have investigated the
relationship between income inequality and environmental quality
in China. Compared with the numerous studies using multinational
data, few studies have focused on China to empirically examine
the relationship between the income gap and environmental per-
formance. Therefore, investigating this relationship in China with
rigorous econometric techniques is the major contribution of this
study.
3. Theoretical framework
To theoretically explain the relationship between income
inequality and environmental quality, previous studies have estab-
lished speciﬁc  theoretical frameworks. For instance, Scruggs (1998)
and Heerink et al. (2001) have investigated the theoretical scheme
in which income inequality would improve environmental qual-
ity in an economy with an “inverted-U”  shaped EKC. In a recent
study, Berthe and Elie (2015) summarized the possible relation-
ships between income inequality and environmental performance
using three types of EKC hypothesizes. Based on previous studies,
we elaborate the nexus of income inequality and environmental
performance with the help of ﬁgures.
As indicated in Fig. 1, when the EKC curve is an “inverted-
U” shape, consider that the economy consists of two population
CKElatnemnorivnE
pollu/g415on 
E2
⎯E -Vf(Y)
E1
                Y 1       Y        Y2          Income level
Fig. 2. The relationship between income levels and environmental quality in a “U”
shaped
 curve.
Environme ntal   
pollu/g415on
EKC
E1
Y1 ⎯Y Y2 In come l evel
E2
⎯E
Fig. 3. The relationship between income levels and environmental quality in lin-
earity.
groups: the poor and the rich. Assume that the income level of
the poor is Y1 and the level of environmental pollution corre-
sponding to the poor is E1, whereas the income level of the rich
is Y2 and the corresponding environmental pollution is E2. As
clearly indicated in Fig. 1, the average level of environmental pol-
lution of the economy ( ¯E) is lower than the level of environmental
pollution corresponding to the average income level at ¯Y. Vf(Y) rep-
resents the difference between the average of the environmental
pollution levels for the poor and the rich (i.e., E1 and E2, respec-
tively) and the level of the environmental pollution corresponding
to the average income level of Y1 and Y2 (i.e., ¯Y). In this case,
income distribution matters for environmental quality. If some
wealth is redistributed from the rich to the poor, the income gap
between the rich and the poor decreases and the average pol-
lution level for the whole economy rises. Conversely, when the
EKC relationship is “U”  shaped, as presented in Fig. 2, enlarging
the income gap would lead to a higher average level of environ-
mental pollution. Because in this case the difference between the
average of the environmental pollution levels for the poor and
the rich and the level of the environmental pollution correspond-
ing to the average income level is negative, to ensure that Vf(Y)
always carries a positive sign, − Vf(Y) is utilized to represent this
difference.3 Another possible EKC relationship is linear, as depicted
in Fig. 3, where income inequality has no effect on environmental
quality.4
3 As Heerink et al. (2001) pointed out, the negation − Vf(Y) could be considered
as
 a measure of income inequality, of which the former proof is given by Heerink
(1994)
 and Heerink and Folmer (1994).
4 Heerink et al. (2001) also provided in-depth explanations for the effects of
income
 inequality on environmental quality using mathematical models. For more
information
 about proof of the relationships between income inequality and envi-
ronmental quality, see Heerink et al. (2001).

[[PAGE 5]]
Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542  537
4. Data source and empirical methodology
4.1. Data source
Compared to cross-sectional data, panel data, which is char-
acterized by large sample volume, can control heteroskedasticity
between different individuals and areas and avoid biased estimates
caused by neglected variables. Therefore, this study employs panel
data from 23 Chinese provinces from 1995 to 2012 (excluding
Tianjin, Hunan Province, Yunnan Province, Jilin Province, Hainan
Province and Shandong Province).5 As there has been no ofﬁcial
statistics of CO2 emissions for Chinese provinces yet, we calcu-
lated provincial CO2 emissions following recent studies like Shao
et al. (2011), Fan et al. (2015) and Hao and Wei (2015). Because this
empirical study aimed to verify the relationship between income
inequality and provincial per capita CO2 emissions, provincial Gini
coefﬁcient  and per capita CO2 emissions are the key explanatory
variables. Based on theoretical analysis, some effects of income dis-
tribution on environmental quality may be indirectly affected by
economic growth. Thus, in addition to the Gini coefﬁcient,  the prod-
uct of the Gini coefﬁcient  and ln GDPperc (logarithm of per capita
GDP converted into 1978 constant prices) were introduced into our
model as explanatory variables. Based on the Lorenz curve, the Ital-
ian economist Gini developed the Gini coefﬁcient  as an index to
estimate distribution equality, which was often employed to mea-
sure income inequality. This study adopted Gini coefﬁcient  data
from 1995 to 2010 provided by Tian (2012) and calculated the data
for the following two years (2011 and 2012) through the method
he employed. The speciﬁc  equation is as follows:
G = P2
c
uc
u Gc + P2
r
ur
u Gr + PcPr
uc − ur
u (1)
where
 Gc and Gr represent Gini coefﬁcients  of income differences
for urban residents and rural residents, respectively; Pc and Pr rep-
resent the proportion of urban and rural population, respectively;
uc and ur represent per capita income of urban and rural residents,
respectively; and u represents per capita income for the entire
province (city, region).
Urban and rural residents’ incomes have different data formats
in the China Statistical Yearbook. The data for urban residents’
income before 1986 and data for rural residents’ income before
2001 were sorted by certain income spectrum. Subsequent data for
urban residents were sorted into 7 unequal groups according to
their income level whereas rural residents were sorted into 5 equal
groups. Therefore, neither an equal nor an unequal method of calcu-
lation can provide consistent results. Because the Gini coefﬁcient  is
deﬁned  as the ratio of the area that lies between the line of equality
and the Lorenz curve over the area of perfect equality of incomes,
we derive the following equation to perform the calculation:
G = 1 − 1
PW
n∑
i=1
(Wi− 1 + Wi) × Pi (2)
In Eq. (2), P stands for total population; and Wi stands for
incomes accumulated until Group i. This method successfully
avoids the problem of dividing groups equally by only consider-
ing the number and income of people in each group. All necessary
data for urban and rural residents’ incomes for different provinces
5 Tianjin, Hunan, Yunnan, Jilin, Hainan and Shandong are not included because
their
 data are incomplete. Chongqing was excluded because it did not become a
municipality
 until 1997. This study treated Sichuan and Chongqing as independent
provincial
 regions to input data. The data come from China Macro Economic Data. For
convenience,
 the term “province”  is used in reference to all provincial administrative
units
 in China throughout the entire study.
come from the “People’s  Livelihood” chapter of the China Statistical
Yearbook.
Moreover, consistent with previous studies (e.g., Hao et al., 2014,
2015), the empirical analysis uses the following control variables:
(1) Real per capita GDP
Many studies indicate that per capita CO2 emissions are
highly correlated with per capita income and public require-
ments for environmental quality. Compared to total GDP, per
capita income is a better reﬂection  of real income and economic
growth level, which clearly display economic inﬂuence  on envi-
ronmental quality. Based on previous research, this study used
the logarithmic form of real per capita GDP (1978 prices as con-
stant) and its quadratic component to reveal the relationship
between per capita income and per capita CO2 emissions.
(2) Population density
Density of population is often used as an inﬂuential  factor
in CO2 emissions studies. However, the relationship between
population density and environmental pollution is uncertain.
High population density normally indicates a higher degree of
industrialization and urbanization, thus more CO2 emissions
exist. Conversely, high population density enables more efﬁ-
cient and intensive energy use. Moreover, because the degree of
environmental pollution is critical to public safety and health,
those who live in areas with higher population density (par-
ticularly in large cities with economically developed areas) are
often more aware of environmental pollution, leading to greater
public desire for improved environmental quality.
(3) Industrial structure
Because most CO2 emissions originate from the secondary
industry, the relative scale of the secondary industry may
have a direct and signiﬁcant  impact on per capita CO2 emis-
sions. In addition, during the sample period, heavy industry has
developed rapidly in many provinces and cities, increasing the
contribution of secondary industry to total GDP. Thus the indus-
trial structure, which is represented by the proportion of value
added by secondary industry in GDP, is regarded as a control
variable in this study.
(4) Urbanization rate
Due to the economy of scale and agglomeration effects
as well as the energy consumption characteristics of urban
residents, urbanization means larger populations and more
economic activity. With both production and consumption
levels improved, increased energy consumption and carbon
emissions occur. However, the accumulation of urban popu-
lation leads to economies of scale for the usage of public goods,
accompanied by lifestyle changes and technology diffusion.
Urbanization may also reduce per capita energy consumption
and carbon emissions.
Real per capita GDP for provinces and cities, value-added GDP
by the secondary industry, population number and density and
urbanization rates are all acquired from the China City Statis-
tical Yearbook, China Energy Statistical Yearbook and Provincial
Statistical Yearbooks of different regions over the years. Data on
China’s total carbon dioxide emissions are obtained from the United
Nations Statistics Division. Table 1 reports descriptive statistics of
the variables used in this study.
4.2. The econometric model
Cross-sectional data were adopted in early studies about income
inequality and environmental quality (Torras and Boyce, 1998).
However, as Jobert et al. (2010) have noted, cross-sectional data
conveyed two aspects of defects: only data from the beginning
and end points of the sample period are used effectively, and the

[[PAGE 6]]
538 Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542
Table 1
Descriptive
 statistics of variables in the model.
Variables Unit Average Maximum Minimum Std. dev Obs.
Total emissions of per capita CO2 kg/per capita 4934.14 27,316.59 1141.66 3593.16 414
Real
 per capita GDP (at 1978 constant piece) Yuan/per  capita 4667.11 30,104.7  575.81 4401.59 414
The
 proportion of the value added of secondary
industry
 in GDP
%
 0.46 0.59 0.23 0.07 414
Population density People/km2 406.11 3778.46 6.66 596.84 414
Urbanization
 rate % 42.42 89.3 13.52 16.86 414
differences between various economies are not carefully consid-
ered. Due to the explicit defects, this study employs the panel data
model. Compared to cross-sectional data, the panel data model
is characterized by larger sample volume, and can control het-
eroskedasticity in different areas and correct errors caused by
neglected variables.
The following logarithmic equation is adopted as the benchmark
regression equation for this study:
ln cit = ˛i + /CRt + ˇ 1 ln yit + ˇ 2(ln yit )2
+ ˇ 3Git + ˇ 4(Git × ln yit ) + zit/DC1 + εit (3)
where cit stands for per capita CO2 emission of Province i in Year
t, yit stands for per capita GDP of Province i in Year t, Git stands for
Gini coefﬁcient  of Province i in Year t, zit stands for other control
variables, ˛ i stands for individual effect of province i that may affect
per capita CO2 emission but is invariant with time, ˇ is the regres-
sion coefﬁcient  and /CRt stands for time effect. εit is the independent
identically distributed (i.i.d.) random disturbance term. Variables
are converted into their logarithmic form to reduce ﬂuctuation  and
the possible heteroskedasticity.
In regression Eq. (3), the most important coefﬁcient  is coefﬁ-
cient ˇ 3. A positive ˇ 3 indicates per capita CO2 emissions increase
with the expansion of the income gap whereas a negative value
indicates that the greater the income gap, the lower per capita CO2
emissions are. Regression coefﬁcients  ˇ 1 and ˇ 2 are also important.
A positive ˇ 1 and negative ˇ 2 indicate that real GDP per capita has
an “inverted-U”  shaped relationship with per capita CO2 emissions,
and a negative ˇ 1 and positive ˇ 2 represent a “U”  shaped relation-
ship. Because an income gap may affect environmental pollution by
inﬂuencing  residents’ income levels, the partial effect of an income
gap on economic development can be described with the following
equation:
∂ ln cit
∂Git∂ ln yit
= (ˇ 1 + 2ˇ 2 ln yit + ˇ 4 ln Git )(ˇ 3 + ˇ 4 ln yit ) + ˇ 4
(4)
If (∂ln cit/∂Git∂ln yit) > 0, then the income gap aggravates the
degree of damage that environmental pollution causes as the
economy develops, or in other words, the income gap weakens
environmental governance functions caused by economic develop-
ment, and delays the arrival of the turning point for environmental
pollution. If (∂ln cit/∂Git∂ln yit) < 0, then the income gap reduces
the degree of damage caused by environmental pollution as the
economy develops. Expansion of the income gap will relieve the
environmental pollution.
Being a static equation, dynamic calculations are not required
in estimating Eq. (3). Two deﬁciencies  emerge when estimat-
ing Eq. (3) using traditional econometric methods. First, variables
are unavoidably omitted because some explanatory variables not
introduced into the regression equation because data are unavail-
able. Second, bidirectional causality exists in dependent variables
and explanatory variables, and regression Eq. (3) has a potential
endogeneity problem. However, traditional econometric methods
cannot control the endogeneity problem effectively, which may
result in some biased estimators of variation coefﬁcients.  Regres-
sion Eq. (3) is, in essence, a dynamic equation. Due to the great
inertia of pollutant emissions, per capita CO2 emissions for adja-
cent years will remain almost constant. Thus, this dynamic factor
must be considered; ignoring this dynamic effect in regression Eq.
(3) may lead to regression errors.
To explicitly introduce dynamic factors into the regression equa-
tion, we add ln ci,t− 1 to the right side of Eq. (3) and obtain:
ln cit = ˛i + /CRt + /DLE ln ci,t− 1 + ˇ 1 ln yit + ˇ 2(ln yit )2
+ ˇ 3Git + ˇ 4(Git × ln yit ) + zit/DC1 + εit (5)
With the ﬁrst  order lag term of dependent variable ln ci,t on the
right side, regression Eq. (5) is a standard dynamic equation.
Using ﬁrst  order lag of the dependent variable as an explanatory
variable in Eq. (5), residual term ε might have sequence correlation
and be related to the ﬁrst  order lag term of the dependent vari-
able. As for dynamic panel data, traditional OLS estimating methods
may produce biased estimates and become inapplicable (Semykina
and Wooldridge, 2010). As for non-static panel data, dynamic panel
models with ﬁxed  effects (DFE) described by Pesaran and Smith
(1995) should be adopted. In the dynamic panel models with ﬁxed
effects, the intercept term (ﬁxed  effects) ˛ i of each city differs
whereas the long-term coefﬁcient  (/DC1) of each explanatory variable
is the same.
Other methods to estimate dynamic Eq. (5) include instrument
variables (IV) and the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM).
Because appropriate instrumental variables are necessary in the
IV method to eliminate endogeneity, and they are difﬁcult  to ﬁnd
in practice, we use the GMM created by Arellano and Bond (1988)
to estimate Eq. (5). GMM is also essentially a method of instru-
ment variables, using predetermined variables and some lag terms
of exogenous variables as instrument variables, which veriﬁes  the
rationality of instrument variables by means of inspection. So far,
the GMM method has been widely used in the studies on the exist-
ence of EKC and the determinants of pollutant emissions in China
(e.g., Shao et al., 2011; Hao and Wei, 2015; Fan et al., 2015).
GMM is generally divided into ﬁrst-difference  GMM and system
GMM, where the former employs time ﬁrst-difference  to process
original data. However, because factors of the same provincial
unit affecting CO2 emissions are invariant with time (e.g., climate,
geographical location, and residents’ energy use habits) and the
possibility of generating obvious errors for regression results has
been eliminated, we adopt ﬁrst-difference  GMM in our regression
analysis.
5. Results and regression analysis
Based on panel data from 23 effective provinces throughout
China, panel regression results of different measurement models
were obtained as presented in tables above during the sample
period from 1995 to 2012. Taking into account economic discrepan-
cies, the imbalanced social developments in China, the income gap
in various regions, per capita income, population density, urbaniza-
tion rate and share of value-added of second industry, we divided

[[PAGE 7]]
Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542  539
Table 2
The
 estimation results.
Scope Nationwide Eastern region Non-eastern region
Econometric model 1 2 3 4 5 6
Gini 0.512** 14.757*** 1.689 − 22.305 0.601* − 24.061***
(0.233) (4.968) (1.270) (71.270) (0.348) (7.197)
ln(GDPperc) − 4.266*** − 2.304* − 6.395** − 2.907 − 3.931** − 4.233***
(0.424) (1.193) (2.711) (7.911) (0.406) (1.439)
ln2 (GDPperc) 0.297*** 0.174*** 0.411*** 0.164 0.287*** 0.221***
(0.026) (0.062) (0.155) (0.577) (0.027) (0.076)
Gini*ln(GDPperc) 1.859*** 2.501 3.153***
(0.645) (7.631) (0.956)
Urban 0.016*** 0.016 0.028***
(0.004) (0.016) (0.009)
ln(popden) 7.267*** − 1.290 − 1.265
(2.042)
 (0.970) (1.493)
Second
 ratio 3.825*** 0.685 5.126*** 3.151 3.315*** 1.490**
(0.430) (0.509) (1.295) (1.236) (0.436) (0.617)
Hansen
 test 0.796 0.053 1.000 0.858 0.986 0.976
A-B
 test of AR(2) 0.746 0.32 0.989 0.784 0.502 0.957
Obs./instrument
 391/33 391/17 136/33 136/17 255/33 255/33
Note:
 ln(GDPperc) and ln2 (GDPperc) represent the logarithmic GDP per capita and its squared term, respectively. The values in brackets are standard errors.
* Signiﬁcance  under level of 10%.
** Signiﬁcance  under level of 5%
*** Signiﬁcance  under level
 of 1%.
the
 
country
 into two parts: the eastern region and non-eastern
region. We then analyzed the panel data. To verify the robustness
of regression results, we tried different forms of regression equa-
tion and obtained estimates for the country, the eastern region
and non-eastern region. Estimation of each panel contains two
parts. The equation in the ﬁrst  group performs a regression of
the main explanatory variables, and the regression equation in the
second group includes other control variables besides explanatory
variables. Using ﬁrst-difference  GMM to control endogeneity and
address missing variables, we perform a regression for the com-
plete sample and two regionally divided sub-samples to obtain the
following results.
As indicated in Table 2, in the ﬁrst  group of regression equa-
tions for every province and region, the dependent variables we
use refer to the logarithmic values of per capita CO2 emissions,
and thus they are used to indicate environmental pollution. The
main explanatory variables are the Gini coefﬁcient,  per capita GDP
and square of logarithmic value of per capita GDP. According to
the estimation results, except for model 4 for the eastern region,
the coefﬁcients  of ln(GDPperc) are signiﬁcantly  negative but the
coefﬁcients  of ln2(GDPperc) are signiﬁcantly  positive, suggesting
the existence of “U”  shaped EKC relationship between CO2 emis-
sions and GDP per capita. The coefﬁcients  of Gini coefﬁcient  are
positive in models (1), (3) and (5) when the interaction term of Gini
coefﬁcient  and GDP per capita is not included; while the coefﬁcients
of Gini coefﬁcient  turn to negative when the interaction term is
incorporated. Overall speaking, these estimation results are basi-
cally consistent with the predictions of the theoretical model, as
we will discuss later. Besides, because the p-values of the Hansen
tests and the Arellano and Bond (1988) tests of AR(2) for all models
are both well above 0.1, the instrumental variables utilized in the
GMM estimations are well designed and valid.6
Because the main purpose of this research is to investigate the
relationship between income inequality and environmental qual-
ity, Gini coefﬁcient,  which is used to measure the size of the income
gap, is the key explanatory variable. In these regression equations,
the values of Gini coefﬁcients  in different regions are basically
6 For more details about the GMM estimation technique, one could refer to
Arellano
 and Bond (1988) and Roodman (2009).
positive,
 
which
 illustrates that environmental pollution would rise
gradually with the widening of the income gap. Per capita GDP and
square of logarithmic value of per capita GDP are used to measure
economic development. As discussed earlier, the estimation results
illustrate that with the development of the economy, pollution
levels would ﬁrst  gradually decrease until reaching a lowest point
and then rise continuously in a “U”  shaped trend. Musolesi et al.
(2010) examined panel data from 109 countries from 1959 to 2001
and found that the relationship between CO2 emissions and per
capita GDP only appear to be an “N”  shaped curve in high-income
countries, whereas CO2 emissions chart an increasing trend with
the increase of per capita GDP in low-income countries. Wang et al.
(2011) investigated relationships between CO2 emissions, energy
consumption and economic growth in China based on the panel
data for 28 provinces from 1995 to 2007 and detected a “U”  shaped
curve between economic growth and CO2 emissions with a turning
point at 3287 Chinese Yuan. Perman and Stern (1999) found that
the parameters in half of EKCs on sulfur dioxide emissions from
1960 to 1990 in approximately 74 countries are biased estimates.
Even if the statistical data are co-integrated, the EKC in many
countries are “U”  shaped rather than “inverted-U”  shaped. The
study’s conclusion that “U”  shaped curves are obtained even in the
presence of a co-integration relationship indicates that simple EKC
models omit important variables. The coefﬁcient  of the second
ratio is obviously positive, which reﬂects  the objective fact that
the industrial sector is the main source of CO2 emissions in China.
The energy consumption structure in China is still dominated by
coal. In cities where secondary industry is more developed, the
per capita CO2 emissions are greater. Seen from a quantitative
relationship, with other conditions unchanged, the per capita
carbon emissions would correspondingly increase 0.051%, 0.169%
and 0.06% when the Gini coefﬁcient  increases every 0.1% across the
country and in eastern and non-eastern regions, which illustrates
that the growth effect of the widening of income gap on carbon
emissions in eastern regions should be more signiﬁcant  than the
nationwide rate. In non-eastern regions, the logarithmic value of
per capita GDP is obviously negative, which illustrates that the
per capita carbon emissions would correspondingly decrease by
4.266%, 6.395% and 3.931% with initial per capita GDP increasing
every 1%. Per capita carbon emissions would correspondingly
increase by 3.825%, 5.126% and 3.315% with the share of secondary

[[PAGE 8]]
540 Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542
industry increasing every 1%, which again illustrates that due to the
energy consumption in the eastern region, the hub for economic
development in China is huge and intensive, and the increase of
share of secondary industry in GDP growth would make carbon
emissions in eastern regions increase at a faster rate.
Because the income gap may inﬂuence  environmental pollu-
tion by affecting economic development, we introduced cross items
of income gap and economic development in the second group of
models to measure this mechanism. The partial effect of cross items
of Gini coefﬁcients  and logarithmic values of per capita GDP are
signiﬁcantly  positive, which suggests that the income gap would
aggravate the damages of environmental pollution as the econ-
omy grows. Theoretically, environmental pollution is subject to
economic development, the urbanization level, population density
and the share of secondary industry. A number of existing empirical
studies also utilized population density as an explanatory vari-
able of pollutant emissions (e.g., Auffhammer and Carson, 2008;
Hao et al., 2015). Researchers have also veriﬁed  the close relation
between pollutant emissions and industrial development (e.g., He,
2009; Zhang et al., 2014). Besides, in some recent studies, the close
relationship between urbanization and environmental quality has
been investigated and veriﬁed  (e.g., Sheng and Guo, 2016; Wang
et al., 2016). Hence, the population density, urbanization ratio, and
industrial structure, measured by the ratio of secondary industry
value added to GDP, are introduced as the control variables. There-
fore, we introduced these factors as control variables for others in
the second equation in different regions. After introducing other
control variables, the values of Gini coefﬁcients  sharply decreased
to negatives with the signiﬁcance  level increased to some extent,
but due to the inclusion of product terms of Gini coefﬁcients  and
GDP, the marginal effect of Gini coefﬁcients  on carbon emissions
should be related to GDP level. Nationwide, this marginal effect is
− 14.757 + 1.859*ln GDPperc. Therefore, when GDP reaches a cer-
tain level (when ln GDPperc = 7.94, the corresponding per capita
GDP is 2802 RMB), this marginal effect should be positive, but per
capita GDPs of almost all provinces after 2001 have exceeded this
level. This ﬁnding  indicates that the inﬂuence  of the income gap
on carbon emissions is basically positive after 2002, and more
extreme the income gap is, the more extreme environmental pollu-
tion will be. However, for eastern regions, the marginal effect of the
Gini coefﬁcient  on carbon emissions is 22.305 + 2.501*ln GDPperc.
When per capita GDP is 7468 RMB, the marginal effect should
be positive; but per capita GDPs after 1995 all have exceeded
this level. Similarly, when per capita GDP is 2446 RMB in non-
eastern regions, a positive marginal effect can be achieved. Per
capita GDP in non-eastern regions after 2000 all exceeded this
level, which indicates that the widening income gap in the east-
ern region would make carbon emissions increase at a faster rate.
This ﬁnding  again veriﬁed  the conclusion obtained from the ﬁrst
group of models. For per capita GDP, the conclusion of the sec-
ond group of models is almost the same as that of the ﬁrst  group
of models, and trends for the relationship between income gap
and carbon emissions accords with the variation tendency of “U”
shaped curves. For population density, the nationwide conclu-
sions are similar to those of the eastern and non-eastern regions.
Increased population density in eastern regions would decrease
carbon emissions, possibly due to better infrastructure develop-
ment and stronger environmental carrying capacity in these areas.
The proper increase of urban population can maximize existing
building energy and transportation infrastructure in downtown,
which can enhance a city’s potential for reducing emissions to
some extent. However, the logarithmic values of population den-
sity for eastern and non-eastern regions are not signiﬁcant,  which
illustrates that the inﬂuence  of population density on carbon emis-
sions is not signiﬁcant.  At the same time, the increase of share
of secondary industry in GDP growth would increase the per
capita carbon emissions in different regions, similar to the ﬁrst
regression group, which indicates that the economic develop-
ment model for secondary industry in China is dominated by an
extensive pattern: heavy industry develops rapidly, and rapid eco-
nomic development occurs at the cost of severe pollution and high
energy consumption. Finally, the regression coefﬁcients  for urban-
ization levels nationwide and in eastern and non-eastern regions
are signiﬁcantly  positive. Every 1% of increase of urbanization rate
would increase carbon emissions nationwide or in eastern and
non-eastern regions by 0.016%, 0.016% and 0.028%, respectively,
which reﬂects  that the urbanization level has relatively little inﬂu-
ence on per capita carbon emissions (the absolute value of the
coefﬁcient  is small) and less inﬂuence  than expected on carbon
emission levels. This phenomenon could be due to different geo-
graphical locations of cities, correspondingly different resources
and technologies, different comprehensive environmental carry-
ing capacities and different absorption and puriﬁcation  functions
for pollutants.
To enhance the explanatory power of the estimation results, it
is necessary to compare the ﬁndings  of this study with the previ-
ous ones. It is noteworthy that most of existing researches on the
relationship between income inequality and environmental qual-
ity using international data found that higher income inequality is
associated with lower pollution and better environmental quality
(e.g., Ravallion et al., 2000; Heerink et al., 2001). Using county-
level data of the U.S., Charafeddine and Boden (2008) also found
that income inequality plays a role of an effect modiﬁer  of the
association between general self-reported health and particulate
pollution. Contrarily, Golley and Meng (2012) utilized a Chinese
household survey data and found that the redistribution of income
from rich to poor households tends to reduce aggregate house-
hold emissions. Generally speaking, the estimation results obtained
from international data or U.S. data are opposite to the basic ﬁnd-
ings of this study, while Golley and Meng’s (2012) result is roughly
in line with this research. The main reason for the signiﬁcant  dif-
ferences between the estimation results for foreign countries and
for China may be different shapes of EKC relationship in foreign
countries and in China. Ravallion et al. (2000) and Heerink et al.
(2001) both found evidence of “inverted-U”  shaped EKC, there-
fore lower level of income inequality would trigger more pollutant
emissions, as shown in Fig. 1. On the contrary, Golley and Meng
(2012) and this study found that the EKC relationship between CO2
emissions and per capita GDP in China is “U”  shaped, therefore
lower income inequality would bring about higher emissions and
deteriorated environmental quality, as Fig. 2 illustrates. As a result,
although the main ﬁndings  of this study are just opposite to those
for international data and foreign countries, our study is still con-
sistent with the theoretical expectations and adds new evidence to
support the theoretical explanations for the relationship between
income inequality and environmental quality, as discussed in the
theoretical framework section.
The ﬁndings  of this study also have important policy implica-
tions for China. Given that the relationship between CO2 emissions
per capita and GDP per capita in China is “U”  shaped, the policies
that reduce income inequality are also beneﬁcial  to the improve-
ment of environmental quality. However, it should be noted that
Chinese government has vowed to reach the peak of CO2 emis-
sions in China by 2030, therefore at some time in the future the
relationship between the CO2 emissions per capita and the income
inequality may become “inverted-U”  shaped. At that time, China
would face a potential trade-off between environmental conserva-
tion and income equality, as the U.S. and many developed countries
do nowadays. As a result, China’s government should utilize the
current opportunity and seize the time to narrow the income gap,
which helps to achieve the government’s goal of constraining CO2
emissions.

[[PAGE 9]]
Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542  541
6. Conclusion and policy suggestions
With the sustainable development of China’s economy and rapid
development of urbanization and industrialization since the 1990s,
pollutant emissions have increased signiﬁcantly  and environmen-
tal quality has deteriorated. In the meantime, due to the unbalanced
development of regional economies and the continuous widening
of the income gap, China’s challenge to improve environmental
quality and narrow the income gap has doubled. To further investi-
gate the relationship between the income gap and environmental
quality in China, this study uses panel data for 23 provinces from
1995 to 2012, taking carbon emission as a proxy indicator of envi-
ronmental pollution, and performs systematic GMM regression to
analyze and verify the relationship between provincial per capita
CO2 emissions and the income gap in China. This study divides
China geographically into eastern and non-eastern regions, con-
ducts regressive studies on their subsamples, respectively, and
analyzes relevant factors that affect per capita CO2 emission in
China. The study draws the following three main conclusions:
(1) During the sample period, per capita CO2 emissions increased
continuously in the 23 provinces as the income gap widened.
The conclusions obtained according to dynamic panel data and
estimated values of systematic GMM regression all support
the existence of this effect. Meanwhile, the income gap factor
increased the negative impact on environmental pollution by
acting on economic growth and promoting economic develop-
ment.
(2) After dividing China geographically into eastern and non-
eastern regions, the author conducted panel data analysis on
two subsamples. The conclusion has illustrated that per capita
CO2 emissions would increase continuously as the income
gap widens in both regions. After controlling endogeneity and
introducing dynamic relations, the GMM regression results
indicate that the inﬂuence  of regional income inequality on CO2
emissions is greater in the east. Per capita CO2 emissions in the
east would increase dramatically with the widening income
gap, whereas the growth is relatively slow in non-eastern
regions.
(3) Factors such as real per capita GDP, population density and the
share of secondary industry in GDP growth and the urbaniza-
tion rate would affect provincial per capita CO2 emissions. The
relationship between real per capita GDP and per capita CO2
emissions is likely to be a “U”  shaped curve. High per capita GDP
and increased share of secondary industry would accelerate per
capita CO2 emissions. Meanwhile, relatively high population
density would make per capita CO2 emissions decrease, but the
effect is not signiﬁcant.  The inﬂuence  of urbanization on CO2
emissions is not signiﬁcant.
Based on these conclusions, the following policy suggestions can
be made:
(1) Due to the exact existence of the inﬂuence  of income gap on CO2
emissions, the bigger the income gap is, the more severe that
environmental pollution will be. Because, an excessive income
gap is not conducive to improving environmental quality at
this stage in China, the government must deepen reform of
the income distribution system and coordinate the relation-
ship between equity and efﬁciency,  narrow the income gap and
build a harmonious society aimed at improving the general wel-
fare of a society while coordinating the relationship between
economic growth and environmental quality.
(2) Based on the results for regional divisions, although the widen-
ing income gap within two subsamples would increase per
capita CO2 emissions, they are still slightly different. Therefore,
different policies must be adopted based on actual conditions
and adjusting for regional differences. For example, the per
capita CO2 emissions in eastern regions and pollutant discharge
efﬁciency  are generally higher than those in the non-eastern
regions. Meanwhile, skewed income distribution in eastern
regions has a more signiﬁcant  inﬂuence  on environmental qual-
ity. Therefore, more powerful environment protection policies
and enhanced supervision should be implemented in east-
ern regions to prompt the fast reduction of per capita CO2
emissions. Further adjusting and optimizing various links for
primary distribution and redistribution and establishing and
perfecting a mechanism to ensure stable income growth for
those with medium and low incomes is necessary to improve
consumption power. The advantages of the sufﬁcient  capital
and social resources in eastern regions can be used to provide
more public beneﬁts  and services and perfect the social secu-
rity network. Per capita CO2 emissions are increasing rapidly
in non-eastern regions due to the lack of advanced tech-
nology, and the environmental carrying capacity is relatively
low. Increasing overall household incomes and promoting
the coordinated development of all regions can be achieved
by encouraging a regional industrial technology alliance,
enhancing relevant technical communication and cooperation
between provinces and paying special attention to vigorously
developing resource-saving and environmentally friendly spe-
cial advantage industries, together with the improvement of
the ecological environment of the western regions.
(3) Because per capita CO2 emissions would ﬁrst  decrease and
then increase with the increase of real per capita GDP and the
eventual increase of the share of secondary industry in GDP
contributes more to the increase of real per capita GDP, a posi-
tive correlation exists between the share of secondary industry
and CO2 per capita emissions, which illustrates that secondary
industry has become a key factor in the emissions of traditional
pollutants. To reduce per capita CO2 emissions and acceler-
ate the peak pollutant discharges value, the share of secondary
industry must be reduced as well as adjusting and optimizing it,
promoting the decarburization of energy consumption, trans-
forming economic development patterns, energetically popu-
larizing the advanced energy-saving and emission reduction
production technology, impelling industrial transformation,
optimizing industrial structure and promoting the coordinated
development of the economy and environment.
Despite some limitations due to the data availability of some
provinces, this study makes some preliminary efforts to investigate
the relationship between income inequity and CO2 emissions in
China. As a result, this study has shed some light on future research
directions. For instance, the relationship between income inequity
and other environmental pollutants, such as SO2 and ﬁne  particles
(PM2.5), could be intensively investigated. Because the EKC rela-
tionship for the emissions of the other pollutants may be quite
different from that for CO2 emissions, the relationship between
income inequality and pollutant emissions and the corresponding
policy implications may also be different. Another possible and
interesting research ﬁeld  is the feedback effects of environmental
quality on income inequality. Generally speaking, the rich would
like to and are affordable to live in the areas with better envi-
ronmental quality, while the poor usually live in more polluted
regions. The inequality in living conditions may further affect
income gap, which in turn inﬂuences  the environmental quality.
This issue is particularly important for the developing countries
like China and India, where a large ratio of population is still
poor. If the feedback effects from environmental quality to income
inequality indeed exist, the government has to pay more attention

[[PAGE 10]]
542 Y. Hao et al. / Ecological Indicators 67 (2016) 533–542
to the improvement of environmental quality in designing effective
policies for poverty relief and reduction of income inequality.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial  support from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant number:
71403015, 71521002), the Scientiﬁc  Research Foundation for the
Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Education Ministry of
China (Grant number: 20152132001), the Excellent Young Scholars
Research Fund of Beijing Institute of Technology (Grant num-
ber: 20142142005), and Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant
number: 9162013). We also appreciate two anonymous reviewers’
helpful and valuable comments. All errors and mistakes are our
owns.
References
Arellano, M., Bond, S., 1988. Dynamic Panel Data Estimation Using PPD: A Guide for
Users. Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Aslanidis, N., Iranzo, S., 2009. Environment and development: is there a Kuznets
curve for CO2 emissions? Appl. Econ. 41 (6), 803–810.
Auffhammer, M., Carson, R.T., 2008. Forecasting the path of China’s CO2 emissions
using province-level information. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 55 (3), 229–247.
Berthe, A., Elie, L., 2015. Mechanisms explaining the impact of economic inequality
on environmental deterioration.
 Ecol. Econ. 116, 191–200.
Bimonte, S., 2002. Information access, income distribution, and the Environmental
Kuznets Curve. Ecol. Econ. 41 (1), 145–156.
Boyce, J.K., 1994. Inequality as a cause of environmental degradation. Ecol. Econ. 11
(3), 169–178.
Boyce, J.K., 2010. Economic Inequality and Environmental Quality: Evidence of Pol-
lution Shifting in Russia. PERI Working Papers., pp. 189.
Charafeddine, R., Boden, L.I., 2008. Does income inequality modify the association
between air pollution and health? Environ. Res. 106 (1), 81–88.
Coondoo, D., Dinda, S., 2002. Causality between income and emission: a country
group-speciﬁc  econometric analysis. Ecol. Econ. 40 (3), 351–367.
Fan, M., Shao, S., Yang, L., 2015. Combining global Malmquist–Luenberger  index
and generalized method of moments to investigate industrial total factor CO2
emission performance: a case of Shanghai (China). Energy Policy 79, 189–201.
Galor, O., Moav, O., 2004. From physical to human capital accumulation: inequality
and the process of development. Rev. Econ. Stud. 71 (4), 1001–1026.
Gawande, K., Berrens, R.P., Bohara, A.K., 2001. A consumption-based theory of the
environmental Kuznets curve. Ecol. Econ. 37 (1), 101–112.
Golley, J., Meng, X., 2012. Income inequality and carbon dioxide emissions: the case
of Chinese urban households. Energy Econ. 34 (6), 1864–1872.
Grossman, G.M., Krueger, A.B., 1991. Environmental Impacts of a North American
Free Trade Agreement (No. w3914). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Grossman, G.M., Krueger, A.B., 1994. Economic Growth and the Environment (No.
w4634). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hao, Y., Liao, H., Wei, Y., 2014. The Environmental Kuznets Curve for China’s per
capita energy consumption and electricity consumption: an empirical estima-
tion on the basis of spatial econometric analysis. China Soft Sci. (1), 134–147  (in
Chinese).
Hao, Y., Wei, Y.M., 2015. When does the turning point in China’s CO2 emissions
occur? Results based on the Green Solow model. Environ. Dev. Econ. 20 (06),
723–745.
Hao, Y., Zhang, Q., Zhong, M., Li, B., 2015. Is there convergence in per capita SO2
emissions in China? An empirical study using city-level panel data. J. Clean.
Prod. 108, 944–954.
He, J., 2009. China’s industrial SO2 emissions and its economic determinants: EKC’s
reduced vs. structural model and the role of international trade. Environ. Dev.
Econ. 14 (02), 227–262.
Heerink, N., 1994. Population Growth Income Distribution and Economic Develop-
ment: Theory Methodology and Empirical Results.
Heerink, N., Folmer, H., 1994. Income distribution and the fulﬁllment  of basic needs:
theory and empirical evidence. J. Policy Model. 16 (6), 625–652.
Heerink, N., Mulatu, A., Bulte, E., 2001. Income inequality and the environ-
ment: aggregation bias in environmental Kuznets curves. Ecol. Econ. 38 (3),
359–367.
Jobert, T., Karanﬁl,  F., Tykhonenko, A., 2010. Convergence of per capita car-
bon dioxide emissions in the EU: legend or reality? Energy Econ. 32 (6),
1364–1373.
John, A., Pecchenino, R., 1994. An overlapping generations model of growth and the
environment. Econ. J. 104, 1393–1410.
Magnani, E., 2000. The Environmental Kuznets Curve, environmental protection
policy and income distribution. Ecol. Econ. 32 (3), 431–443.
Martinez-Alier, J., 1995. Political ecology, distributional conﬂicts,  and economic
incommensurability. New Left Rev. 211, 70–88.
Musolesi, A., Mazzanti, M., Zoboli, R., 2010. A panel data heterogeneous Bayesian
estimation of environmental Kuznets curves for CO2 emissions. Appl. Econ. 42
(18),
 2275–2287.
Panayotou, T., 1993. Empirical Tests and Policy Analysis of Environmental Degrada-
tion at Different Stages of Economic Development (No. 292778). International
Labour Organization.
Perman, R., Stern, D.I., 1999. The Environmental Kuznets Curve: Implications of Non-
stationarity. Australian National University, Mimeo.
Perman, R., Stern, D.I., 2003. Evidence from panel unit root and cointegration tests
that
 the environmental Kuznets curve does not exist. Aust. J. Agric. Resour. Econ.
47 (3), 325–347.
Pesaran, M.H., Smith, R., 1995. Estimating long-run relationships from dynamic het-
erogeneous panels. J. Econom. 68 (1), 79–113.
Ravallion,
 M., Heil, M., Jalan, J., 2000. Carbon emissions and income inequality.
Oxford Econ. Papers, 651–669.
Roodman, D., 2009. A note on the theme of too many instruments. Oxford Bull. Econ.
Stat. 71 (1), 135–158.
Scruggs, L.A., 1998. Political and economic inequality and the environment. Ecol.
Econ. 26 (3), 259–275.
Selden, T.M., Song, D., 1994. Environmental quality and development: is there a
Kuznets curve for air pollution emissions? J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 27 (2),
147–162.
Semykina, A., Wooldridge, J.M., 2010. Estimating panel data models in the presence
of endogeneity and selection. J. Econom. 157 (2), 375–380.
Shaﬁk,  N., Bandyopadhyay, S., 1992. Economic Growth and Environmental Quality:
Time-series and
 Cross-country Evidence, vol. 904. World Bank Publications.
Shao, S., Yang, L., Yu, M., Yu, M., 2011. Estimation, characteristics, and determinants
of energy-related industrial CO2 emissions in Shanghai (China), 1994–2009.
Energy Policy 39 (10), 6476–6494.
Sheng, P., Guo, X., 2016. The long-run and short-run impacts of urbanization on
carbon dioxide emissions. Econ. Model. 53, 208–215.
Tian, W., 2012. The measurement of Gini coefﬁcients  for Chinese provincial residents
and an analysis on their changing trend. Econ. Sci. (2), 48–59  (in Chinese).
Torras, M.,
 Boyce, J.K., 1998. Income, inequality, and pollution: a reassessment of the
environmental Kuznets curve. Ecol. Econ. 25 (2), 147–160.
Wang, Q., Zeng, Y.E., Wu, B.W., 2016. Exploring the relationship between urbaniza-
tion, energy consumption, and CO2 emissions in different provinces of China.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 54, 1563–1579.
Wang, S.S., Zhou, D.Q., Zhou, P., Wang, Q.W., 2011. CO2 emissions, energy consump-
tion and economic growth in China: a panel data analysis. Energy Policy 39 (9),
4870–4875.
Zhang, Y.J., 2011. Interpreting the dynamic nexus between energy consumption
and economic growth: empirical evidence from Russia. Energy Policy 39 (5),
2265–2272.
Zhang, Y.J., Da, Y.B., 2015. The decomposition of energy-related carbon emission and
its decoupling with economic growth in China. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 41,
1255–1266.
Zhang, Y.J., Hao, J.F., 2016. The evaluation of environmental capacity: evidence in
Hunan province of China. Ecol. Indic. 60, 514–523.
Zhang,
 Y.J., Liu, Z., Zhang, H., Tan, T.D., 2014. The impact of economic growth, indus-
trial structure and urbanization on carbon emission intensity in China. Nat.
Hazards 73 (2), 579–595.
Zhang, Y.J., Peng, H.R., Liu, Z., Tan, W., 2015. Direct energy rebound effect for road
passenger transport in China: a dynamic panel quantile regression approach.
Energy Policy 87, 303–313.